
CALEB WILLIAMS

OR THINGS AS THEY ARE

BY WILLIAM GODWIN

WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY ERNEST A. BAKER, M.A.


LONDON

1903




DRAMATIS PERSONAE


MR. FERDINANDO FALKLAND, a high-spirited and highly cultured gentleman,
a country squire in "a remote county of England."

CALEB WILLIAMS, a youth, his secretary, the discoverer of his secret,
and the supposed narrator of the consequent events.

MR. COLLINS, Falkland's steward and Caleb's friend.

THOMAS, a servant of Falkland's.

MR. FORESTER, Falkland's brother-in-law.

MR. BARNABAS TYRREL, a brutal and tyrannical squire.

MISS EMILY MELVILLE, his cousin and dependent, whom he cruelly maltreats
and does to death.

GRIMES, a brutal rustic, suborned by Tyrrel to abduct Miss Melville.

DR. WILSON; MRS. HAMMOND, friends of Miss Melville. MR. HAWKINS, farmer;
YOUNG HAWKINS, his son, Victims of Tyrrel's brutality, and wrongfully
hanged as his murderers.

GINES, a robber and thief-taker, instrument of Falkland's vengeance upon
Caleb.

MR. RAYMOND, an "Arcadian" captain of robbers.

LARKINS, one of his band.

AN OLD HAG, housekeeper to the robbers.

A GAOLER.

MISS PEGGY, the gaoler's daughter.

MRS. MARNEY, a poor gentlewoman, Caleb's friend in distress.

MR. SPURREL, a friend who informs on Caleb.

MRS. DENISON, a cultivated lady with whom Caleb is for a while on
friendly terms.


PREFACE

BY THE AUTHOR.


The following narrative is intended to answer a purpose more general and
important than immediately appears upon the face of it. The question now
afloat in the world respecting THINGS AS THEY ARE is the most
interesting that can be presented to the human mind. While one party
pleads for reformation and change, the other extols in the warmest terms
the existing constitution of society. It seemed as if something would be
gained for the decision of this question if that constitution were
faithfully developed in its practical effects. What is now presented to
the public is no refined and abstract speculation; it is a study and
delineation of things passing in the moral world. It is but of late that
the inestimable importance of political principles has been adequately
apprehended. It is now known to philosophers that the spirit and
character of the Government intrudes itself into every rank of society.
But this is a truth highly worthy to be communicated to persons whom
books of philosophy and science are never likely to reach. Accordingly,
it was proposed, in the invention of the following work, to comprehend,
as far as the progressive nature of a single story would allow, a
general review of the modes of domestic and unrecorded despotism by
which man becomes the destroyer of man. If the author shall have taught
a valuable lesson, without subtracting from the interest and passion by
which a performance of this sort ought to be characterised, he will have
reason to congratulate himself upon the vehicle he has chosen.

_May_ 12, 1794.

This preface was withdrawn in the original edition, in compliance with
the alarms of booksellers. "Caleb Williams" made his first appearance in
the world in the same month in which the sanguinary plot broke out
against the liberties of Englishmen, which was happily terminated by the
acquittal of its first intended victims in the close of that year.
Terror was the order of the day; and it was feared that even the humble
novelist might be shown to be constructively a traitor.

_October_ 29, 1795.




AUTHOR'S LATEST PREFACE.


LONDON,

_November_ 20, 1832.

"CALEB WILLIAMS" has always been regarded by the public with an unusual
degree of favour. The proprietor of "THE STANDARD NOVELS" has therefore
imagined that even an account of the concoction and mode of writing of
the work would be viewed with some interest.

I finished the "Enquiry concerning Political Justice," the first work
which may be considered as written by me in a certain degree in the
maturity of my intellectual powers, and bearing my name, early in
January, 1793; and about the middle of the following month the book was
published. It was my fortune at that time to be obliged to consider my
pen as the sole instrument for supplying my current expenses. By the
liberality of my bookseller, Mr. George Robinson, of Paternoster Row, I
was enabled then, and for nearly ten years before, to meet these
expenses, while writing different things of obscure note, the names of
which, though innocent and in some degree useful, I am rather inclined
to suppress. In May, 1791, I projected this, my favourite work, and from
that time gave up every other occupation that might interfere with it.
My agreement with Robinson was that he was to supply my wants at a
specified rate while the book was in the train of composition. Finally,
I was very little beforehand with the world on the day of its
publication, and was therefore obliged to look round and consider to
what species of industry I should next devote myself.

I had always felt in myself some vocation towards the composition of a
narrative of fictitious adventure; and among the things of obscure note
which I have above referred to were two or three pieces of this nature.
It is not therefore extraordinary that some project of the sort should
have suggested itself on the present occasion.

But I stood now in a very different situation from that in which I had
been placed at a former period. In past years, and even almost from
boyhood, I was perpetually prone to exclaim with Cowley:

  "What shall I do to be for ever known,
  And make the age to come my own?"

But I had endeavoured for ten years, and was as far from approaching my
object as ever. Everything I wrote fell dead-born from the press. Very
often I was disposed to quit the enterprise in despair. But still I felt
ever and anon impelled to repeat my effort.

At length I conceived the plan of Political Justice. I was convinced
that my object of building to myself a name would never be attained by
merely repeating and refining a little upon what other men had said,
even though I should imagine that I delivered things of this sort with a
more than usual point and elegance. The world, I believed, would accept
nothing from me with distinguishing favour that did not bear upon the
face of it the undoubted stamp of originality. Having long ruminated
upon the principles of Political Justice, I persuaded myself that I
could offer to the public, in a treatise on this subject, things at once
new, true, and important. In the progress of the work I became more
sanguine and confident. I talked over my ideas with a few familiar
friends during its progress, and they gave me every generous
encouragement. It happened that the fame of my book, in some
inconsiderable degree, got before its publication, and a certain number
of persons were prepared to receive it with favour. It would be false
modesty in me to say that its acceptance, when published, did not nearly
come up to everything that could soberly have been expected by me. In
consequence of this, the tone of my mind, both during the period in
which I was engaged in the work and afterwards, acquired a certain
elevation, and made me now unwilling to stoop to what was insignificant.

I formed a conception of a book of fictitious adventure that should in
some way be distinguished by a very powerful interest. Pursuing this
idea, I invented first the third volume of my tale, then the second, and
last of all the first. I bent myself to the conception of a series of
adventures of flight and pursuit; the fugitive in perpetual apprehension
of being overwhelmed with the worst calamities, and the pursuer, by his
ingenuity and resources, keeping his victim in a state of the most
fearful alarm. This was the project of my third volume. I was next
called upon to conceive a dramatic and impressive situation adequate to
account for the impulse that the pursuer should feel, incessantly to
alarm and harass his victim, with an inextinguishable resolution never
to allow him the least interval of peace and security. This I
apprehended could best be effected by a secret murder, to the
investigation of which the innocent victim should be impelled by an
unconquerable spirit of curiosity. The murderer would thus have a
sufficient motive to persecute the unhappy discoverer, that he might
deprive him of peace, character, and credit, and have him for ever in
his power. This constituted the outline of my second volume.

The subject of the first volume was still to be invented. To account
for the fearful events of the third, it was necessary that the pursuer
should be invested with every advantage of fortune, with a resolution
that nothing could defeat or baffle, and with extraordinary resources of
intellect. Nor could my purpose of giving an overpowering interest to my
tale be answered without his appearing to have been originally endowed
with a mighty store of amiable dispositions and virtues, so that his
being driven to the first act of murder should be judged worthy of the
deepest regret, and should be seen in some measure to have arisen out of
his virtues themselves. It was necessary to make him, so to speak, the
tenant of an atmosphere of romance, so that every reader should feel
prompted almost to worship him for his high qualities. Here were ample
materials for a first volume.

I felt that I had a great advantage in thus carrying back my invention
from the ultimate conclusion to the first commencement of the train of
adventures upon which I purposed to employ my pen. An entire unity of
plot would be the infallible result; and the unity of spirit and
interest in a tale truly considered gives it a powerful hold on the
reader, which can scarcely be generated with equal success in any other
way.

I devoted about two or three weeks to the imagining and putting down
hints for my story before I engaged seriously and methodically in its
composition. In these hints I began with my third volume, then proceeded
to my second, and last of all grappled with the first. I filled two or
three sheets of demy writing-paper, folded in octavo, with these
memorandums. They were put down with great brevity, yet explicitly
enough to secure a perfect recollection of their meaning, within the
time necessary for drawing out the story at full, in short paragraphs of
two, three, four, five, or six lines each.

I then sat down to write my story from the beginning. I wrote for the
most part but a short portion in any single day. I wrote only when the
afflatus was upon me. I held it for a maxim that any portion that was
written when I was not fully in the vein told for considerably worse
than nothing. Idleness was a thousand times better in this case than
industry against the grain. Idleness was only time lost; and the next
day, it may be, was as promising as ever. It was merely a day perished
from the calendar. But a passage written feebly, flatly, and in a wrong
spirit, constituted an obstacle that it was next to impossible to
correct and set right again. I wrote therefore by starts; sometimes for
a week or ten days not a line. Yet all came to the same thing in the
sequel. On an average, a volume of "Caleb Williams" cost me four months,
neither less nor more.

It must be admitted, however, that during the whole period, bating a few
intervals, my mind was in a high state of excitement. I said to myself a
thousand times, "I will write a tale that shall constitute an epoch in
the mind of the reader, that no one, after he has read it, shall ever be
exactly the same man that he was before."--I put these things down just
as they happened, and with the most entire frankness. I know that it
will sound like the most pitiable degree of self-conceit. But such
perhaps ought to be the state of mind of an author when he does his
best. At any rate, I have said nothing of my vainglorious impulse for
nearly forty years.

When I had written about seven-tenths of the first volume, I was
prevailed upon by the extreme importunity of an old and intimate friend
to allow him the perusal of my manuscript. On the second day he returned
it with a note to this purpose: "I return you your manuscript, because I
promised to do so. If I had obeyed the impulse of my own mind, I should
have thrust it in the fire. If you persist, the book will infallibly
prove the grave of your literary fame."

I doubtless felt no implicit deference for the judgment of my friendly
critic. Yet it cost me at least two days of deep anxiety before I
recovered the shock. Let the reader picture to himself my situation. I
felt no implicit deference for the judgment of my friendly critic. But
it was all I had for it. This was my first experiment of an unbiassed
decision. It stood in the place of all the world to me. I could not, and
I did not feel disposed to, appeal any further. If I had, how could I
tell that the second and third judgment would be more favourable than
the first? Then what would have been the result? No; I had nothing for
it but to wrap myself in my own integrity. By dint of resolution I
became invulnerable. I resolved to go on to the end, trusting as I could
to my own anticipations of the whole, and bidding the world wait its
time before it should be admitted to the consult.

I began my narrative, as is the more usual way, in the third person. But
I speedily became dissatisfied. I then assumed the first person, making
the hero of my tale his own historian; and in this mode I have persisted
in all my subsequent attempts at works of fiction. It was infinitely the
best adapted, at least, to my vein of delineation, where the thing in
which my imagination revelled the most freely was the analysis of the
private and internal operations of the mind, employing my metaphysical
dissecting knife in tracing and laying bare the involutions of motive,
and recording the gradually accumulating impulses which led the
personages I had to describe primarily to adopt the particular way of
proceeding in which they afterwards embarked.

When I had determined on the main purpose of my story, it was ever my
method to get about me any productions of former authors that seemed to
bear on my subject. I never entertained the fear that in this way of
proceeding I should be in danger of servilely copying my predecessors. I
imagined that I had a vein of thinking that was properly my own, which
would always preserve me from plagiarism. I read other authors, that I
might see what they had done, or, more properly, that I might forcibly
hold my mind and occupy my thoughts in a particular train, I and my
predecessors travelling in some sense to the same goal, at the same time
that I struck out a path of my own, without ultimately heeding the
direction they pursued, and disdaining to inquire whether by any chance
it for a few steps coincided or did not coincide with mine.

Thus, in the instance of "Caleb Williams," I read over a little old
book, entitled "The Adventures of Mademoiselle de St. Phale," a French
Protestant in the times of the fiercest persecution of the Huguenots,
who fled through France in the utmost terror, in the midst of eternal
alarms and hair-breadth escapes, having her quarters perpetually beaten
up, and by scarcely any chance finding a moment's interval of security.
I turned over the pages of a tremendous compilation, entitled "God's
Revenge against Murder," where the beam of the eye of Omniscience was
represented as perpetually pursuing the guilty, and laying open his most
hidden retreats to the light of day. I was extremely conversant with the
"Newgate Calendar" and the "Lives of the Pirates." In the meantime no
works of fiction came amiss to me, provided they were written with
energy. The authors were still employed upon the same mine as myself,
however different was the vein they pursued: we were all of us engaged
in exploring the entrails of mind and motive, and in tracing the various
rencontres and clashes that may occur between man and man in the
diversified scene of human life.

I rather amused myself with tracing a certain similitude between the
story of Caleb Williams and the tale of Bluebeard, than derived any
hints from that admirable specimen of the terrific. Falkland was my
Bluebeard, who had perpetrated atrocious crimes, which, if discovered,
he might expect to have all the world roused to revenge against him.
Caleb Williams was the wife who, in spite of warning, persisted in his
attempts to discover the forbidden secret; and, when he had succeeded,
struggled as fruitlessly to escape the consequences, as the wife of
Bluebeard in washing the key of the ensanguined chamber, who, as often
as she cleared the stain of blood from the one side, found it showing
itself with frightful distinctness on the other.

When I had proceeded as far as the early pages of my third volume, I
found myself completely at a stand. I rested on my arms from the 2nd of
January, 1794, to the 1st of April following, without getting forward in
the smallest degree. It has ever been thus with me in works of any
continuance. The bow will not be for ever bent:

  "Opere in longo fas est obrepere somnum."

I endeavoured, however, to take my repose to myself in security, and not
to inflict a set of crude and incoherent dreams upon my readers. In the
meantime, when I revived, I revived in earnest, and in the course of
that month carried on my work with unabated speed to the end.

Thus I have endeavoured to give a true history of the concoction and
mode of writing of this mighty trifle. When I had done, I soon became
sensible that I had done in a manner nothing. How many flat and insipid
parts does the book contain! How terribly unequal does it appear to me!
From time to time the author plainly reels to and fro like a drunken
man. And, when I had done all, what had I done? Written a book to amuse
boys and girls in their vacant hours, a story to be hastily gobbled up
by them, swallowed in a pusillanimous and unanimated mood, without
chewing and digestion. I was in this respect greatly impressed with the
confession of one of the most accomplished readers and excellent critics
that any author could have fallen in with (the unfortunate Joseph
Gerald). He told me that he had received my book late one evening, and
had read through the three volumes before he closed his eyes. Thus, what
had cost me twelve months' labour, ceaseless heartaches and industry,
now sinking in despair, and now roused and sustained in unusual energy,
he went over in a few hours, shut the book, laid himself on his pillow,
slept, and was refreshed, and cried,

  "To-morrow to fresh woods and pastures new."

I had thought to have said something here respecting the concoction of
"St. Leon" and "Fleetwood." But all that occurs to me on the subject
seems to be anticipated in the following




PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.


_February 14, 1805._

Yet another novel from the same pen, which has twice before claimed the
patience of the public in this form. The unequivocal indulgence which
has been extended to my two former attempts, renders me doubly
solicitous not to forfeit the kindness I have experienced.

One caution I have particularly sought to exercise: "not to repeat
myself." Caleb Williams was a story of very surprising and uncommon
events, but which were supposed to be entirely within the laws and
established course of nature, as she operates in the planet we inhabit.
The story of St. Leon is of the miraculous class; and its design, to
"mix human feelings and passions with incredible situations, and thus
render them impressive and interesting."

Some of those fastidious readers--they may be classed among the best
friends an author has, if their admonitions are judiciously
considered--who are willing to discover those faults which do not offer
themselves to every eye, have remarked that both these tales are in a
vicious style of writing; that Horace has long ago decided that the
story we cannot believe we are by all the laws of criticism called upon
to hate; and that even the adventures of the honest secretary, who was
first heard of ten years ago, are so much out of the usual road that not
one reader in a million can ever fear they will happen to himself.

Gentlemen critics, I thank you. In the present volumes I have served you
with a dish agreeable to your own receipt, though I cannot say with any
sanguine hope of obtaining your approbation.

The following story consists of such adventures as for the most part
have occurred to at least one half of the Englishmen now existing who
are of the same rank of life as my hero. Most of them have been at
college, and shared in college excesses; most of them have afterward run
a certain gauntlet of dissipation; most have married, and, I am afraid,
there are few of the married tribe who have not at some time or other
had certain small misunderstandings with their wives.[A] To be sure,
they have not all of them felt and acted under these trite adventures as
my hero does. In this little work the reader will scarcely find anything
to "elevate and surprise;" and, if it has any merit, it must consist in
the liveliness with which it brings things home to the imagination, and
the reality it gives to the scenes it pourtrays.

[Footnote A: I confess, however, the inability I found to weave a
catastrophe, such as I desired, out of these ordinary incidents. What I
have here said, therefore, must not be interpreted as applicable to the
concluding sheets of my work.]

Yes, even in the present narrative, I have aimed at a certain kind of
novelty--a novelty which may be aptly expressed by a parody on a
well-known line of Pope; it relates:

  "Things often done, but never yet described."

In selecting among common and ordinary adventures, I have endeavoured to
avoid such as a thousand novels before mine have undertaken to develop.
Multitudes of readers have themselves passed through the very incidents
I relate; but, for the most part, no work has hitherto recorded them. If
I have told them truly, I have added somewhat to the stock of books
which should enable a recluse, shut up in his closet, to form an idea of
what is passing in the world. It is inconceivable, meanwhile, how much,
by this choice of a subject, I increased the arduousness of my task. It
is so easy to do, a little better, or a little worse, what twenty
authors have done before! If I had foreseen from the first all the
difficulty of my project, my courage would have failed me to undertake
the execution of it.

Certain persons, who condescend to make my supposed inconsistencies the
favourite object of their research, will perhaps remark with exultation
on the respect expressed in this work for marriage, and exclaim, "It was
not always thus!" referring to the pages in which this subject is
treated in the "Enquiry concerning Political Justice" for the proof of
their assertion. The answer to this remark is exceedingly simple. The
production referred to in it, the first foundation of its author's claim
to public distinction and favour, was a treatise, aiming to ascertain
what new institutions in political society might be found more
conducive to general happiness than those which at present prevail. In
the course of this disquisition it was enquired whether marriage, as it
stands described and supported in the laws of England, might not with
advantage admit of certain modifications. Can anything be more distinct
than such a proposition on the one hand and a recommendation on the
other that each man for himself should supersede and trample upon the
institutions of the country in which he lives? A thousand things might
be found excellent and salutary, if brought into general practice, which
would in some cases appear ridiculous, and in others be attended with
tragical consequences, if prematurely acted upon by a solitary
individual. The author of "Political Justice," as appears again and
again in the pages of that work, is the last man in the world to
recommend a pitiful attempt, by scattered examples, to renovate the face
of society, instead of endeavouring, by discussion and reasoning, to
effect a grand and comprehensive improvement in the sentiments of its
members.

       *       *       *       *       *




VOLUME THE FIRST.




CHAPTER I.


My life has for several years been a theatre of calamity. I have been a
mark for the vigilance of tyranny, and I could not escape. My fairest
prospects have been blasted. My enemy has shown himself inaccessible to
entreaties, and untired in persecution. My fame, as well as my
happiness, has become his victim. Every one, as far as my story has been
known, has refused to assist me in my distress, and has execrated my
name. I have not deserved this treatment. My own conscience witnesses in
behalf of that innocence, my pretensions to which are regarded in the
world as incredible. There is now, however, little hope that I shall
escape from the toils that universally beset me. I am incited to the
penning of these memoirs only by a desire to divert my mind from the
deplorableness of my situation, and a faint idea that posterity may by
their means be induced to render me a justice which my contemporaries
refuse. My story will, at least, appear to have that consistency which
is seldom attendant but upon truth.

I was born of humble parents, in a remote county of England. Their
occupations were such as usually fall to the lot of peasants, and they
had no portion to give me, but an education free from the usual sources
of depravity, and the inheritance, long since lost by their unfortunate
progeny! of an honest fame. I was taught the rudiments of no science,
except reading, writing, and arithmetic. But I had an inquisitive mind,
and neglected no means of information from conversation or books. My
improvement was greater than my condition in life afforded room to
expect.

There are other circumstances deserving to be mentioned as having
influenced the history of my future life. I was somewhat above the
middle stature. Without being particularly athletic in appearance, or
large in my dimensions, I was uncommonly vigorous and active. My joints
were supple, and I was formed to excel in youthful sports. The habits of
my mind, however, were to a certain degree at war with the dictates of
boyish vanity. I had considerable aversion to the boisterous gaiety of
the village gallants, and contrived to satisfy my love of praise with an
unfrequent apparition at their amusements. My excellence in these
respects, however, gave a turn to my meditations. I delighted to read of
feats of activity, and was particularly interested by tales in which
corporeal ingenuity or strength are the means resorted to for supplying
resources and conquering difficulties. I inured myself to mechanical
pursuits, and devoted much of my time to an endeavour after mechanical
invention.

The spring of action which, perhaps more than any other, characterised
the whole train of my life, was curiosity. It was this that gave me my
mechanical turn; I was desirous of tracing the variety of effects which
might be produced from given causes. It was this that made me a sort of
natural philosopher; I could not rest till I had acquainted myself with
the solutions that had been invented for the phenomena of the universe.
In fine, this produced in me an invincible attachment to books of
narrative and romance. I panted for the unravelling of an adventure with
an anxiety, perhaps almost equal to that of the man whose future
happiness or misery depended on its issue. I read, I devoured
compositions of this sort. They took possession of my soul; and the
effects they produced were frequently discernible in my external
appearance and my health. My curiosity, however, was not entirely
ignoble: village anecdotes and scandal had no charms for me: my
imagination must be excited; and when that was not done, my curiosity
was dormant.

The residence of my parents was within the manor of Ferdinando Falkland,
a country squire of considerable opulence. At an early age I attracted
the favourable notice of Mr. Collins, this gentleman's steward, who used
to call in occasionally at my father's. He observed the particulars of
my progress with approbation, and made a favourable report to his master
of my industry and genius.

In the summer of the year ----, Mr. Falkland visited his estate in our
county after an absence of several months. This was a period of
misfortune to me. I was then eighteen years of age. My father lay dead
in our cottage. I had lost my mother some years before. In this forlorn
situation I was surprised with a message from the squire, ordering me to
repair to the mansion-house the morning after my father's funeral.

Though I was not a stranger to books, I had no practical acquaintance
with men. I had never had occasion to address a person of this elevated
rank, and I felt no small uneasiness and awe on the present occasion. I
found Mr. Falkland a man of small stature, with an extreme delicacy of
form and appearance. In place of the hard-favoured and inflexible
visages I had been accustomed to observe, every muscle and petty line of
his countenance seemed to be in an inconceivable degree pregnant with
meaning. His manner was kind, attentive, and humane. His eye was full of
animation; but there was a grave and sad solemnity in his air, which,
for want of experience, I imagined was the inheritance of the great, and
the instrument by which the distance between them and their inferiors
was maintained. His look bespoke the unquietness of his mind, and
frequently wandered with an expression of disconsolateness and anxiety.

My reception was as gracious and encouraging as I could possibly desire.
Mr. Falkland questioned me respecting my learning, and my conceptions of
men and things, and listened to my answers with condescension and
approbation. This kindness soon restored to me a considerable part of my
self-possession, though I still felt restrained by the graceful, but
unaltered dignity of his carriage. When Mr. Falkland had satisfied his
curiosity, he proceeded to inform me that he was in want of a secretary,
that I appeared to him sufficiently qualified for that office, and that,
if, in my present change of situation, occasioned by the death of my
father, I approved of the employment, he would take me into his family.

I felt highly flattered by the proposal, and was warm in the expression
of my acknowledgments. I set eagerly about the disposal of the little
property my father had left, in which I was assisted by Mr. Collins. I
had not now a relation in the world, upon whose kindness and
interposition I had any direct claim. But, far from regarding this
deserted situation with terror, I formed golden visions of the station
I was about to occupy. I little suspected that the gaiety and lightness
of heart I had hitherto enjoyed were upon the point of leaving me for
ever, and that the rest of my days were devoted to misery and alarm.

My employment was easy and agreeable. It consisted partly in the
transcribing and arranging certain papers, and partly in writing from my
master's dictation letters of business, as well as sketches of literary
composition. Many of these latter consisted of an analytical survey of
the plans of different authors and conjectural speculations upon hints
they afforded, tending either to the detection of their errors, or the
carrying forward their discoveries. All of them bore powerful marks of a
profound and elegant mind, well stored with literature, and possessed of
an uncommon share of activity and discrimination.

My station was in that part of the house which was appropriated for the
reception of books, it being my duty to perform the functions of
librarian as well as secretary. Here my hours would have glided in
tranquillity and peace, had not my situation included in it
circumstances totally different from those which attended me in my
father's cottage. In early life my mind had been much engrossed by
reading and reflection: my intercourse with my fellow mortals was
occasional and short. But, in my new residence, I was excited by every
motive of interest and novelty to study my master's character; and I
found in it an ample field for speculation and conjecture.

His mode of living was in the utmost degree recluse and solitary. He had
no inclination to scenes of revelry and mirth. He avoided the busy
haunts of men; nor did he seem desirous to compensate for this privation
by the confidence of friendship. He appeared a total stranger to every
thing which usually bears the appellation of pleasure. His features were
scarcely ever relaxed into a smile, nor did that air which spoke the
unhappiness of his mind at any time forsake them: yet his manners were
by no means such as denoted moroseness and misanthropy. He was
compassionate and considerate for others, though the stateliness of his
carriage and the reserve of his temper were at no time interrupted. His
appearance and general behaviour might have strongly interested all
persons in his favour; but the coldness of his address, and the
impenetrableness of his sentiments, seemed to forbid those
demonstrations of kindness to which one might otherwise have been
prompted.

Such was the general appearance of Mr. Falkland: but his disposition was
extremely unequal. The distemper which afflicted him with incessant
gloom had its paroxysms. Sometimes he was hasty, peevish, and
tyrannical; but this proceeded rather from the torment of his mind than
an unfeeling disposition; and when reflection recurred, he appeared
willing that the weight of his misfortune should fall wholly upon
himself. Sometimes he entirely lost his self-possession, and his
behaviour was changed into frenzy: he would strike his forehead, his
brows became knit, his features distorted, and his teeth ground one
against the other. When he felt the approach of these symptoms, he would
suddenly rise, and, leaving the occupation, whatever it was, in which he
was engaged, hasten into a solitude upon which no person dared to
intrude.

It must not be supposed that the whole of what I am describing was
visible to the persons about him; nor, indeed, was I acquainted with it
in the extent here stated but after a considerable time, and in gradual
succession. With respect to the domestics in general, they saw but
little of their master. None of them, except myself, from the nature of
my functions, and Mr. Collins, from the antiquity of his service and the
respectableness of his character, approached Mr. Falkland, but at stated
seasons and for a very short interval. They knew him only by the
benevolence of his actions, and the principles of inflexible integrity
by which he was ordinarily guided; and though they would sometimes
indulge their conjectures respecting his singularities, they regarded
him upon the whole with veneration, as a being of a superior order.

One day, when I had been about three months in the service of my patron,
I went to a closet, or small apartment, which was separated from the
library by a narrow gallery that was lighted by a small window near the
roof. I had conceived that there was no person in the room, and intended
only to put any thing in order that I might find out of its place. As I
opened the door, I heard at the same instant a deep groan, expressive of
intolerable anguish. The sound of the door in opening seemed to alarm
the person within; I heard the lid of a trunk hastily shut, and the
noise as of fastening a lock. I conceived that Mr. Falkland was there,
and was going instantly to retire; but at that moment a voice, that
seemed supernaturally tremendous, exclaimed, Who is there? The voice was
Mr. Falkland's. The sound of it thrilled my very vitals. I endeavoured
to answer, but my speech failed, and being incapable of any other reply,
I instinctively advanced within the door into the room. Mr. Falkland was
just risen from the floor upon which he had been sitting or kneeling.
His face betrayed strong symptoms of confusion. With a violent effort,
however, these symptoms vanished, and instantaneously gave place to a
countenance sparkling with rage.

"Villain!" cried he, "what has brought you here?" I hesitated a
confused and irresolute answer. "Wretch!" interrupted Mr. Falkland, with
uncontrollable impatience, "you want to ruin me. You set yourself as a
spy upon my actions; but bitterly shall you repent your insolence. Do
you think you shall watch my privacies with impunity?" I attempted to
defend myself. "Begone, devil!" rejoined he. "Quit the room, or I will
trample you into atoms." Saying this, he advanced towards me. But I was
already sufficiently terrified, and vanished in a moment. I heard the
door shut after me with violence; and thus ended this extraordinary
scene.

I saw him again in the evening, and he was then tolerably composed. His
behaviour, which was always kind, was now doubly attentive and soothing.
He seemed to have something of which he wished to disburthen his mind,
but to want words in which to convey it. I looked at him with anxiety
and affection. He made two unsuccessful efforts, shook his head, and
then putting five guineas into my hand, pressed it in a manner that I
could feel proceeded from a mind pregnant with various emotions, though
I could not interpret them. Having done this, he seemed immediately to
recollect himself, and to take refuge in the usual distance and
solemnity of his manner.

I easily understood that secrecy was one of the things expected from me;
and, indeed, my mind was too much disposed to meditate upon what I had
heard and seen, to make it a topic of indiscriminate communication. Mr.
Collins, however, and myself happened to sup together that evening,
which was but seldom the case, his avocations obliging him to be much
abroad. He could not help observing an uncommon dejection and anxiety in
my countenance, and affectionately enquired into the reason. I
endeavoured to evade his questions, but my youth and ignorance of the
world gave me little advantage for that purpose. Beside this, I had been
accustomed to view Mr. Collins with considerable attachment, and I
conceived from the nature of his situation that there could be small
impropriety in making him my confident in the present instance. I
repeated to him minutely every thing that had passed, and concluded with
a solemn declaration that, though treated with caprice, I was not
anxious for myself; no inconvenience or danger should ever lead me to a
pusillanimous behaviour; and I felt only for my patron, who, with every
advantage for happiness, and being in the highest degree worthy of it,
seemed destined to undergo unmerited distress.

In answer to my communication, Mr. Collins informed me that some
incidents, of a nature similar to that which I related, had fallen under
his own knowledge, and that from the whole he could not help concluding
that our unfortunate patron, was at times disordered in his intellects.
"Alas!" continued he, "it was not always thus! Ferdinando Falkland was
once the gayest of the gay. Not indeed of that frothy sort, who excite
contempt instead of admiration, and whose levity argues thoughtlessness
rather than felicity. His gaiety was always accompanied with dignity. It
was the gaiety of the hero and the scholar. It was chastened with
reflection and sensibility, and never lost sight either of good taste or
humanity. Such as it was however, it denoted a genuine hilarity of
heart, imparted an inconceivable brilliancy to his company and
conversation, and rendered him the perpetual delight of the diversified
circles he then willingly frequented. You see nothing of him, my dear
Williams, but the ruin of that Falkland who was courted by sages, and
adored by the fair. His youth, distinguished in its outset by the most
unusual promise, is tarnished. His sensibility is shrunk up and withered
by events the most disgustful to his feelings. His mind was fraught with
all the rhapsodies of visionary honour; and, in his sense, nothing but
the grosser part, the mere shell of Falkland, was capable of surviving
the wound that his pride has sustained."

These reflections of my friend Collins strongly tended to inflame my
curiosity, and I requested him to enter into a more copious explanation.
With this request he readily complied; as conceiving that whatever
delicacy it became him to exercise in ordinary cases, it would be out of
place in my situation; and thinking it not improbable that Mr. Falkland,
but for the disturbance and inflammation of his mind, would be disposed
to a similar communication. I shall interweave with Mr. Collins's story
various information which I afterwards received from other quarters,
that I may give all possible perspicuity to the series of events. To
avoid confusion in my narrative, I shall drop the person of Collins, and
assume to be myself the historian of our patron. To the reader it may
appear at first sight as if this detail of the preceding life of Mr.
Falkland were foreign to my history. Alas! I know from bitter experience
that it is otherwise. My heart bleeds at the recollection of his
misfortunes, as if they were my own. How can it fail to do so? To his
story the whole fortune of my life was linked: because he was miserable,
my happiness, my name, and my existence have been irretrievably blasted.




CHAPTER II.


Among the favourite authors of his early years were the heroic poets of
Italy. From them he imbibed the love of chivalry and romance. He had too
much good sense to regret the times of Charlemagne and Arthur. But,
while his imagination was purged by a certain infusion of philosophy, he
conceived that there was in the manners depicted by these celebrated
poets something to imitate, as well as something to avoid. He believed
that nothing was so well calculated to make men delicate, gallant, and
humane, as a temper perpetually alive to the sentiments of birth and
honour. The opinions he entertained upon these topics were illustrated
in his conduct, which was assiduously conformed to the model of heroism
that his fancy suggested.

With these sentiments he set out upon his travels, at the age at which
the grand tour is usually made; and they were rather confirmed than
shaken by the adventures that befel him. By inclination he was led to
make his longest stay in Italy; and here he fell into company with
several young noblemen whose studies and principles were congenial to
his own. By them he was assiduously courted, and treated with the most
distinguished applause. They were delighted to meet with a foreigner,
who had imbibed all the peculiarities of the most liberal and honourable
among themselves. Nor was he less favoured and admired by the softer
sex. Though his stature was small, his person had an air of uncommon
dignity. His dignity was then heightened by certain additions which were
afterwards obliterated,--an expression of frankness, ingenuity, and
unreserve, and a spirit of the most ardent enthusiasm. Perhaps no
Englishman was ever in an equal degree idolised by the inhabitants of
Italy.

It was not possible for him to have drunk so deeply of the fountain of
chivalry without being engaged occasionally in affairs of honour, all of
which were terminated in a manner that would not have disgraced the
chevalier Bayard himself. In Italy, the young men of rank divide
themselves into two classes,--those who adhere to the pure principles of
ancient gallantry, and those who, being actuated by the same acute sense
of injury and insult, accustom themselves to the employment of hired
bravoes as their instruments of vengeance. The whole difference, indeed,
consists in the precarious application of a generally received
distinction. The most generous Italian conceives that there are certain
persons whom it would be contamination for him to call into the open
field. He nevertheless believes that an indignity cannot be expiated but
with blood, and is persuaded that the life of a man is a trifling
consideration, in comparison of the indemnification to be made to his
injured honour. There is, therefore, scarcely any Italian that would
upon some occasions scruple assassination. Men of spirit among them,
notwithstanding the prejudices of their education, cannot fail to have a
secret conviction of its baseness, and will be desirous of extending as
far as possible the cartel of honour. Real or affected arrogance teaches
others to regard almost the whole species as their inferiors, and of
consequence incites them to gratify their vengeance without danger to
their persons. Mr. Falkland met with some of these. But his undaunted
spirit and resolute temper gave him a decisive advantage even in such
perilous rencounters. One instance, among many, of his manner of
conducting himself among this proud and high-spirited people it may be
proper to relate. Mr. Falkland is the principal agent in my history; and
Mr. Falkland in the autumn and decay of his vigour, such as I found him,
cannot be completely understood without a knowledge of his previous
character, as it was in all the gloss of youth, yet unassailed by
adversity, and unbroken in upon by anguish or remorse.

At Rome he was received with particular distinction at the house of
marquis Pisani, who had an only daughter, the heir of his immense
fortune, and the admiration of all the young nobility of that
metropolis. Lady Lucretia Pisani was tall, of a dignified form, and
uncommonly beautiful. She was not deficient in amiable qualities, but
her soul was haughty, and her carriage not unfrequently contemptuous.
Her pride was nourished by the consciousness of her charms, by her
elevated rank, and the universal adoration she was accustomed to
receive.

Among her numerous lovers count Malvesi was the individual most favoured
by her father, nor did his addresses seem indifferent to her. The count
was a man of considerable accomplishments, and of great integrity and
benevolence of disposition. But he was too ardent a lover, to be able
always to preserve the affability of his temper. The admirers whose
addresses were a source of gratification to his mistress, were a
perpetual uneasiness to him. Placing his whole happiness in the
possession of this imperious beauty, the most trifling circumstances
were capable of alarming him for the security of his pretensions. But
most of all he was jealous of the English cavalier. Marquis Pisani, who
had spent many years in France, was by no means partial to the
suspicious precautions of Italian fathers, and indulged his daughter in
considerable freedoms. His house and his daughter, within certain
judicious restraints, were open to the resort of male visitants. But,
above all, Mr. Falkland, as a foreigner, and a person little likely to
form pretensions to the hand of Lucretia, was received upon a footing of
great familiarity. The lady herself, conscious of innocence, entertained
no scruple about trifles, and acted with the confidence and frankness of
one who is superior to suspicion.

Mr. Falkland, after a residence of several weeks at Rome, proceeded to
Naples. Meanwhile certain incidents occurred that delayed the intended
nuptials of the heiress of Pisani. When he returned to Rome Count
Malvesi was absent. Lady Lucretia, who had been considerably amused
before with the conversation of Mr. Falkland, and who had an active and
enquiring mind, had conceived, in the interval between his first and
second residence at Rome, a desire to be acquainted with the English
language, inspired by the lively and ardent encomiums of our best
authors that she had heard from their countryman. She had provided
herself with the usual materials for that purpose, and had made some
progress during his absence. But upon his return she was forward to make
use of the opportunity, which, if missed, might never occur again with
equal advantage, of reading select passages of our poets with an
Englishman of uncommon taste and capacity.

This proposal necessarily led to a more frequent intercourse. When Count
Malvesi returned, he found Mr. Falkland established almost as an inmate
of the Pisani palace. His mind could not fail to be struck with the
criticalness of the situation. He was perhaps secretly conscious that
the qualifications of the Englishman were superior to his own; and he
trembled for the progress that each party might have made in the
affection of the other, even before they were aware of the danger. He
believed that the match was in every respect such as to flatter the
ambition of Mr. Falkland; and he was stung even to madness by the idea
of being deprived of the object dearest to his heart by this tramontane
upstart.

He had, however, sufficient discretion first to demand an explanation of
Lady Lucretia. She, in the gaiety of her heart, trifled with his
anxiety. His patience was already exhausted, and he proceeded in his
expostulation, in language that she was by no means prepared to endure
with apathy. Lady Lucretia had always been accustomed to deference and
submission; and, having got over something like terror, that was at
first inspired by the imperious manner in which she was now catechised,
her next feeling was that of the warmest resentment. She disdained to
satisfy so insolent a questioner, and even indulged herself in certain
oblique hints calculated to strengthen his suspicions. For some time she
described his folly and presumption in terms of the most ludicrous
sarcasm, and then, suddenly changing her style, bid him never let her
see him more except upon the footing of the most distant acquaintance,
as she was determined never again to subject herself to so unworthy a
treatment. She was happy that he had at length disclosed to her his true
character, and would know how to profit of her present experience to
avoid a repetition of the same danger. All this passed in the full
career of passion on both sides, and Lady Lucretia had no time to
reflect upon what might be the consequence of thus exasperating her
lover.

Count Malvesi left her in all the torments of frenzy. He believed that
this was a premeditated scene, to find a pretence for breaking off an
engagement that was already all but concluded; or, rather, his mind was
racked with a thousand conjectures: he alternately thought that the
injustice might be hers or his own; and he quarrelled with Lady
Lucretia, himself, and the whole world. In this temper he hastened to
the hotel of the English cavalier. The season of expostulation was now
over, and he found himself irresistibly impelled to justify his
precipitation with the lady, by taking for granted that the subject of
his suspicion was beyond the reach of doubt.

Mr. Falkland was at home. The first words of the count were an abrupt
accusation of duplicity in the affair of Lady Lucretia, and a challenge.
The Englishman had an unaffected esteem for Malvesi, who was in reality
a man of considerable merit, and who had been one of Mr. Falkland's
earliest Italian acquaintance, they having originally met at Milan. But
more than this, the possible consequence of a duel in the present
instance burst upon his mind. He had the warmest admiration for Lady
Lucretia, though his feelings were not those of a lover; and he knew
that, however her haughtiness might endeavour to disguise it, she was
impressed with a tender regard for Count Malvesi. He could not bear to
think that any misconduct of his should interrupt the prospects of so
deserving a pair. Guided by these sentiments, he endeavoured to
expostulate with the Italian. But his attempts were ineffectual. His
antagonist was drunk with choler, and would not listen to a word that
tended to check the impetuosity of his thoughts. He traversed the room
with perturbed steps, and even foamed with anguish and fury. Mr.
Falkland, finding that all was to no purpose, told the count, that, if
he would return to-morrow at the same hour, he would attend him to any
scene of action he should think proper to select.

From Count Malvesi Mr. Falkland immediately proceeded to the palace of
Pisani. Here he found considerable difficulty in appeasing the
indignation of Lady Lucretia. His ideas of honour would by no means
allow him to win her to his purpose by disclosing the cartel he had
received; otherwise that disclosure would immediately have operated as
the strongest motive that could have been offered to this disdainful
beauty. But, though she dreaded such an event, the vague apprehension
was not strong enough to induce her instantly to surrender all the
stateliness of her resentment. Mr. Falkland, however, drew so
interesting a picture of the disturbance of Count Malvesi's mind, and
accounted in so flattering a manner for the abruptness of his conduct,
that this, together with the arguments he adduced, completed the
conquest of Lady Lucretia's resentment. Having thus far accomplished his
purpose, he proceeded to disclose to her every thing that had passed.

The next day Count Malvesi appeared, punctual to his appointment, at Mr.
Falkland's hotel. Mr. Falkland came to the door to receive him, but
requested him to enter the house for a moment, as he had still an affair
of three minutes to despatch. They proceeded to a parlour. Here Mr.
Falkland left him, and presently returned leading in Lady Lucretia
herself, adorned in all her charms, and those charms heightened upon the
present occasion by a consciousness of the spirited and generous
condescension she was exerting. Mr. Falkland led her up to the
astonished count; and she, gently laying her hand upon the arm of her
lover, exclaimed with the most attractive grace, "Will you allow me to
retract the precipitate haughtiness into which I was betrayed?" The
enraptured count, scarcely able to believe his senses, threw himself
upon his knees before her, and stammered out his reply, signifying that
the precipitation had been all his own, that he only had any forgiveness
to demand, and, though they might pardon, he could never pardon himself
for the sacrilege he had committed against her and this god-like
Englishman. As soon as the first tumults of his joy had subsided, Mr.
Falkland addressed him thus:--

"Count Malvesi, I feel the utmost pleasure in having thus by peaceful
means disarmed your resentment, and effected your happiness. But I must
confess, you put me to a severe trial. My temper is not less impetuous
and fiery than your own, and it is not at all times that I should have
been thus able to subdue it. But I considered that in reality the
original blame was mine. Though your suspicion was groundless, it was
not absurd. We have been trifling too much in the face of danger. I
ought not, under the present weakness of our nature and forms of
society, to have been so assiduous in my attendance upon this enchanting
woman. It would have been little wonder, if, having so many
opportunities, and playing the preceptor with her as I have done, I had
been entangled before I was aware, and harboured a wish which I might
not afterwards have had courage to subdue. I owed you an atonement for
this imprudence.

"But the laws of honour are in the utmost degree rigid; and there was
reason to fear that, however anxious I were to be your friend, I might
be obliged to be your murderer. Fortunately, the reputation of my
courage is sufficiently established, not to expose it to any impeachment
by my declining your present defiance. It was lucky, however, that in
our interview of yesterday you found me alone, and that accident by
that means threw the management of the affair into my disposal. If the
transaction should become known, the conclusion will now become known
along with the provocation, and I am satisfied. But if the challenge had
been public, the proofs I had formerly given of courage would not have
excused my present moderation; and, though desirous to have avoided the
combat, it would not have been in my power. Let us hence each of us
learn to avoid haste and indiscretion, the consequences of which may be
inexpiable but with blood; and may Heaven bless you in a consort of whom
I deem you every way worthy!"

I have already said that this was by no means the only instance, in the
course of his travels, in which Mr. Falkland acquitted himself in the
most brilliant manner as a man of gallantry and virtue. He continued
abroad during several years, every one of which brought some fresh
accession to the estimation in which he was held, as well as to his own
impatience of stain or dishonour. At length he thought proper to return
to England, with the intention of spending the rest of his days at the
residence of his ancestors.




CHAPTER III.


From the moment he entered upon the execution of this purpose, dictated
as it probably was by an unaffected principle of duty, his misfortunes
took their commencement. All I have further to state of his history is
the uninterrupted persecution of a malignant destiny, a series of
adventures that seemed to take their rise in various accidents, but
pointing to one termination. Him they overwhelmed with an anguish he
was of all others least qualified to bear; and these waters of
bitterness, extending beyond him, poured their deadly venom upon others.
I being myself the most unfortunate of their victims.

The person in whom these calamities originated was Mr. Falkland's
nearest neighbour, a man of estate equal to his own, by name Barnabas
Tyrrel. This man one might at first have supposed of all others least
qualified from instruction, or inclined by the habits of his life, to
disturb the enjoyments of a mind so richly endowed as that of Mr.
Falkland. Mr. Tyrrel might have passed for a true model of the English
squire. He was early left under the tuition of his mother, a woman of
narrow capacity, and who had no other child. The only remaining member
of the family it may be necessary to notice was Miss Emily Melville, the
orphan daughter of Mr. Tyrrel's paternal aunt; who now resided in the
family mansion, and was wholly dependent on the benevolence of its
proprietors.

Mrs. Tyrrel appeared to think that there was nothing in the world so
precious as her hopeful Barnabas. Every thing must give way to his
accommodation and advantage; every one must yield the most servile
obedience to his commands. He must not be teased or restricted by any
forms of instruction; and of consequence his proficiency, even in the
arts of writing and reading, was extremely slender. From his birth he
was muscular and sturdy; and, confined to the _ruelle_ of his mother, he
made much such a figure as the whelp-lion that a barbarian might have
given for a lap-dog to his mistress.

But he soon broke loose from these trammels, and formed an acquaintance
with the groom and the game-keeper. Under their instruction he proved as
ready a scholar, as he had been indocile and restive to the pedant who
held the office of his tutor. It was now evident that his small
proficiency in literature was by no means to be ascribed to want of
capacity. He discovered no contemptible sagacity and quick-wittedness in
the science of horse-flesh, and was eminently expert in the arts of
shooting, fishing, and hunting. Nor did he confine himself to these, but
added the theory and practice of boxing, cudgel play, and quarter-staff.
These exercises added ten-fold robustness and vigour to his former
qualifications.

His stature, when grown, was somewhat more than five feet ten inches in
height, and his form might have been selected by a painter as a model
for that hero of antiquity, whose prowess consisted in felling an ox
with his fist, and devouring him at a meal. Conscious of his advantage
in this respect, he was insupportably arrogant, tyrannical to his
inferiors, and insolent to his equals. The activity of his mind being
diverted from the genuine field of utility and distinction, showed
itself in the rude tricks of an overgrown lubber. Here, as in all his
other qualifications, he rose above his competitors; and if it had been
possible to overlook the callous and unrelenting disposition which they
manifested, one could scarcely have denied his applause to the invention
these freaks displayed, and the rough, sarcastic wit with which they
were accompanied.

Mr. Tyrrel was by no means inclined to permit these extraordinary merits
to rust in oblivion. There was a weekly assembly at the nearest
market-town, the resort of all the rural gentry. Here he had hitherto
figured to the greatest advantage as grand master of the _coterie_, no
one having an equal share of opulence, and the majority, though still
pretending to the rank of gentry, greatly his inferior in this essential
article. The young men in this circle looked up to this insolent bashaw
with timid respect, conscious of the comparative eminence that
unquestionably belonged to the powers of his mind; and he well knew how
to maintain his rank with an inflexible hand. Frequently indeed he
relaxed his features, and assumed a temporary appearance of affableness
and familiarity; but they found by experience, that if any one,
encouraged by his condescension, forgot the deference which Mr. Tyrrel
considered as his due, he was soon taught to repent his presumption. It
was a tiger that thought proper to toy with a mouse, the little animal
every moment in danger of being crushed by the fangs of his ferocious
associate. As Mr. Tyrrel had considerable copiousness of speech, and a
rich, but undisciplined imagination, he was always sure of an audience.
His neighbours crowded round, and joined in the ready laugh, partly from
obsequiousness, and partly from unfeigned admiration. It frequently
happened, however; that, in the midst of his good humour, a
characteristic refinement of tyranny would suggest itself to his mind.
When his subjects, encouraged by his familiarity, had discarded their
precaution, the wayward fit would seize him, a sudden cloud overspread
his brow, his voice transform from the pleasant to the terrible, and a
quarrel of a straw immediately ensue with the first man whose face he
did not like. The pleasure that resulted to others from the exuberant
sallies of his imagination was, therefore, not unalloyed with sudden
qualms of apprehension and terror. It may be believed that this
despotism did not gain its final ascendancy without being contested in
the outset. But all opposition was quelled with a high hand by this
rural Antaeus. By the ascendancy of his fortune, and his character among
his neighbours, he always reduced his adversary to the necessity of
encountering him at his own weapons, and did not dismiss him without
making him feel his presumption through every joint in his frame. The
tyranny of Mr. Tyrrel would not have been so patiently endured, had not
his colloquial accomplishments perpetually come in aid of that authority
which his rank and prowess originally obtained.

The situation of our squire with the fair was still more enviable than
that which he maintained among persons of his own sex. Every mother
taught her daughter to consider the hand of Mr. Tyrrel as the highest
object of her ambition. Every daughter regarded his athletic form and
his acknowledged prowess with a favourable eye. A form eminently
athletic is, perhaps, always well proportioned; and one of the
qualifications that women are early taught to look for in the male sex,
is that of a protector. As no man was adventurous enough to contest his
superiority, so scarcely any woman in this provincial circle would have
scrupled to prefer his addresses to those of any other admirer. His
boisterous wit had peculiar charms for them; and there was no spectacle
more flattering to their vanity, than seeing this Hercules exchange his
club for a distaff. It was pleasing to them to consider, that the fangs
of this wild beast, the very idea of which inspired trepidation into the
boldest hearts, might be played with by them with the utmost security.

Such was the rival that Fortune, in her caprice, had reserved for the
accomplished Falkland. This untamed, though not undiscerning brute, was
found capable of destroying the prospects of a man the most eminently
qualified to enjoy and to communicate happiness. The feud that sprung up
between them was nourished by concurring circumstances, till it attained
a magnitude difficult to be paralleled; and, because they regarded each
other with a deadly hatred, I have become an object of misery and
abhorrence.

The arrival of Mr. Falkland gave an alarming shock to the authority of
Mr. Tyrrel in the village assembly and in all scenes of indiscriminate
resort. His disposition by no means inclined him to withhold himself
from scenes of fashionable amusement; and he and his competitor were
like two stars fated never to appear at once above the horizon. The
advantages Mr. Falkland possessed in the comparison are palpable; and
had it been otherwise, the subjects of his rural neighbour were
sufficiently disposed to revolt against his merciless dominion. They had
hitherto submitted from fear, and not from love; and, if they had not
rebelled, it was only for want of a leader. Even the ladies regarded Mr.
Falkland with particular complacence. His polished manners were
peculiarly in harmony with feminine delicacy. The sallies of his wit
were far beyond those of Mr. Tyrrel in variety and vigour; in addition
to which they had the advantage of having their spontaneous exuberance
guided and restrained by the sagacity of a cultivated mind. The graces
of his person were enhanced by the elegance of his deportment; and the
benevolence and liberality of his temper were upon all occasions
conspicuous. It was common indeed to Mr. Tyrrel, together with Mr.
Falkland, to be little accessible to sentiments of awkwardness and
confusion. But for this Mr. Tyrrel was indebted to a self-satisfied
effrontery, and a boisterous and over-bearing elocution, by which he was
accustomed to discomfit his assailants; while Mr. Falkland, with great
ingenuity and candour of mind, was enabled by his extensive knowledge of
the world, and acquaintance with his own resources, to perceive almost
instantaneously the proceeding it most became him to adopt.

Mr. Tyrrel contemplated the progress of his rival with uneasiness and
aversion. He often commented upon it to his particular confidents as a
thing altogether inconceivable. Mr. Falkland he described as an animal
that was beneath contempt. Diminutive and dwarfish in his form, he
wanted to set up a new standard of human nature, adapted to his
miserable condition. He wished to persuade people that the human species
were made to be nailed to a chair, and to pore over books. He would have
them exchange those robust exercises which make us joyous in the
performance, and vigorous in the consequences, for the wise labour of
scratching our heads for a rhyme and counting our fingers for a verse.
Monkeys were as good men as these. A nation of such animals would have
no chance with a single regiment of the old English votaries of beef and
pudding. He never saw any thing come of learning but to make people
foppish and impertinent; and a sensible man would not wish a worse
calamity to the enemies of his nation, than to see them run mad after
such pernicious absurdities. It was impossible that people could
seriously feel any liking for such a ridiculous piece of goods as this
outlandish foreign-made Englishman. But he knew very well how it was: it
was a miserable piece of mummery that was played only in spite of him.
But God for ever blast his soul, if he were not bitterly revenged upon
them all!

If such were the sentiments of Mr. Tyrrel, his patience found ample
exercise in the language which was held by the rest of his neighbours on
the same subject. While he saw nothing in Mr. Falkland but matter of
contempt, they appeared to be never weary of recounting his praises.
Such dignity, such affability, so perpetual an attention to the
happiness of others, such delicacy of sentiment and expression! Learned
without ostentation, refined without foppery, elegant without
effeminacy! Perpetually anxious to prevent his superiority from being
painfully felt, it was so much the more certainly felt to be real, and
excited congratulation instead of envy in the spectator. It is scarcely
necessary to remark, that the revolution of sentiment in this rural
vicinity belongs to one of the most obvious features of the human mind.
The rudest exhibition of art is at first admired, till a nobler is
presented, and we are taught to wonder at the facility with which before
we had been satisfied. Mr. Tyrrel thought there would be no end to the
commendation; and expected when their common acquaintance would fall
down and adore the intruder. The most inadvertent expression of applause
inflicted upon him the torment of demons. He writhed with agony, his
features became distorted, and his looks inspired terror. Such suffering
would probably have soured the kindest temper; what must have been its
effect upon Mr. Tyrrel's, always fierce, unrelenting, and abrupt?

The advantages of Mr. Falkland seemed by no means to diminish with their
novelty. Every new sufferer from Mr. Tyrrel's tyranny immediately went
over to the standard of his adversary. The ladies, though treated by
their rustic swain with more gentleness than the men, were occasionally
exposed to his capriciousness and insolence. They could not help
remarking the contrast between these two leaders in the fields of
chivalry, the one of whom paid no attention to any one's pleasure but
his own, while the other seemed all good-humour and benevolence. It was
in vain that Mr. Tyrrel endeavoured to restrain the ruggedness of his
character. His motive was impatience, his thoughts were gloomy, and his
courtship was like the pawings of an elephant. It appeared as if his
temper had been more human while he indulged in its free bent, than now
that he sullenly endeavoured to put fetters upon its excesses.

Among the ladies of the village-assembly already mentioned, there was
none that seemed to engage more of the kindness of Mr. Tyrrel than Miss
Hardingham. She was also one of the few that had not yet gone over to
the enemy, either because she really preferred the gentleman who was her
oldest acquaintance, or that she conceived from calculation this conduct
best adapted to insure her success in a husband. One day, however, she
thought proper, probably only by way of experiment, to show Mr. Tyrrel
that she could engage in hostilities, if he should at any time give her
sufficient provocation. She so adjusted her manoeuvres as to be engaged
by Mr. Falkland as his partner for the dance of the evening, though
without the smallest intention on the part of that gentleman (who was
unpardonably deficient in the sciences of anecdote and match-making) of
giving offence to his country neighbour. Though the manners of Mr.
Falkland were condescending and attentive, his hours of retirement were
principally occupied in contemplations too dignified for scandal, and
too large for the altercations of a vestry, or the politics of an
election-borough.

A short time before the dances began, Mr. Tyrrel went up to his fair
inamorata, and entered into some trifling conversation with her to fill
up the time, as intending in a few minutes to lead her forward to the
field. He had accustomed himself to neglect the ceremony of soliciting
beforehand a promise in his favour, as not supposing it possible that
any one would dare dispute his behests; and, had it been otherwise, he
would have thought the formality unnecessary in this case, his general
preference to Miss Hardingham being notorious.

While he was thus engaged, Mr. Falkland came up. Mr. Tyrrel always
regarded him with aversion and loathing. Mr. Falkland, however, slided
in a graceful and unaffected manner into the conversation already begun;
and the animated ingenuousness of his manner was such, as might for the
time have disarmed the devil of his malice. Mr. Tyrrel probably
conceived that his accosting Miss Hardingham was an accidental piece of
general ceremony, and expected every moment when he would withdraw to
another part of the room.

The company now began to be in motion for the dance, and Mr. Falkland
signified as much to Miss Hardingham. "Sir," interrupted Mr. Tyrrel
abruptly, "that lady is my partner."--"I believe not, sir: that lady has
been so obliging as to accept my invitation."--"I tell you, sir, no.
Sir, I have an interest in that lady's affections; and I will suffer no
man to intrude upon my claims."--"The lady's affections are not the
subject of the present question."--"Sir, it is to no purpose to parley.
Make room, sir!"--Mr. Falkland gently repelled his antagonist. "Mr.
Tyrrel!" returned he, with some firmness, "let us have no altercation in
this business: the master of the ceremonies is the proper person to
decide in a difference of this sort, if we cannot adjust it: we can
neither of us intend to exhibit our valour before the ladies, and shall
therefore cheerfully submit to his verdict."--"Damn me, sir, if I
understand--" "Softly, Mr. Tyrrel; I intended you no offence. But, sir,
no man shall prevent my asserting that to which I have once acquired a
claim!"

Mr. Falkland uttered these words with the most unruffled temper in the
world. The tone in which he spoke had acquired elevation, but neither
roughness nor impatience. There was a fascination in his manner that
made the ferociousness of his antagonist subside into impotence. Miss
Hardingham had begun to repent of her experiment, but her alarm was
speedily quieted by the dignified composure of her new partner. Mr.
Tyrrel walked away without answering a word. He muttered curses as he
went, which the laws of honour did not oblige Mr. Falkland to overhear,
and which indeed it would have been no easy task to have overheard with
accuracy. Mr. Tyrrel would not, perhaps, have so easily given up his
point, had not his own good sense presently taught him, that, however
eager he might be for revenge, this was not the ground he should desire
to occupy. But, though he could not openly resent this rebellion against
his authority, he brooded over it in the recesses of a malignant mind;
and it was evident enough that he was accumulating materials for a
bitter account, to which he trusted his adversary should one day be
brought.




CHAPTER IV.


This was only one out of innumerable instances, that every day seemed to
multiply, of petty mortifications which Mr. Tyrrel was destined to
endure on the part of Mr. Falkland. In all of them Mr. Falkland
conducted himself with such unaffected propriety, as perpetually to add
to the stock of his reputation. The more Mr. Tyrrel struggled with his
misfortune, the more conspicuous and inveterate it became. A thousand
times he cursed his stars, which took, as he apprehended, a malicious
pleasure in making Mr. Falkland, at every turn, the instrument of his
humiliation. Smarting under a succession of untoward events, he
appeared to feel, in the most exquisite manner, the distinctions paid to
his adversary, even in those points in which he had not the slightest
pretensions. An instance of this now occurred.

Mr. Clare, a poet whose works have done immortal honour to the country
that produced him, had lately retired, after a life spent in the
sublimest efforts of genius, to enjoy the produce of his economy, and
the reputation he had acquired, in this very neighbourhood. Such an
inmate was looked up to by the country gentlemen with a degree of
adoration. They felt a conscious pride in recollecting that the boast of
England was a native of their vicinity; and they were by no means
deficient in gratitude when they saw him, who had left them an
adventurer, return into the midst of them, in the close of his days,
crowned with honours and opulence. The reader is acquainted with his
works: he has, probably, dwelt upon them with transport; and I need not
remind him of their excellence: but he is, perhaps, a stranger to his
personal qualifications; he does not know that his productions were
scarcely more admirable than his conversation. In company he seemed to
be the only person ignorant of the greatness of his fame. To the world
his writings will long remain a kind of specimen of what the human mind
is capable of performing; but no man perceived their defects so acutely
as he, or saw so distinctly how much yet remained to be effected: he
alone appeared to look upon his works with superiority and indifference.
One of the features that most eminently distinguished him was a
perpetual suavity of manners, a comprehensiveness of mind, that regarded
the errors of others without a particle of resentment, and made it
impossible for any one to be his enemy. He pointed out to men their
mistakes with frankness and unreserve, his remonstrances produced
astonishment and conviction, but without uneasiness, in the party to
whom they were addressed: they felt the instrument that was employed to
correct their irregularities, but it never mangled what it was intended
to heal. Such were the moral qualities that distinguished him among his
acquaintance. The intellectual accomplishments he exhibited were,
principally, a tranquil and mild enthusiasm, and a richness of
conception which dictated spontaneously to his tongue, and flowed with
so much ease, that it was only by retrospect you could be made aware of
the amazing variety of ideas that had been presented.

Mr. Clare certainly found few men in this remote situation that were
capable of participating in his ideas and amusements. It has been among
the weaknesses of great men to fly to solitude, and converse with woods
and groves, rather than with a circle of strong and comprehensive minds
like their own. From the moment of Mr. Falkland's arrival in the
neighbourhood, Mr. Clare distinguished him in the most flattering
manner. To so penetrating a genius there was no need of long experience
and patient observation to discover the merits and defects of any
character that presented itself. The materials of his judgment had long
since been accumulated; and, at the close of so illustrious a life, he
might almost be said to see through nature at a glance. What wonder that
he took some interest in a mind in a certain degree congenial with his
own? But to Mr. Tyrrel's diseased imagination, every distinction
bestowed on his neighbour seemed to be expressly intended as an insult
to him. On the other hand, Mr. Clare, though gentle and benevolent in
his remonstrances to a degree that made the taking offence impossible,
was by no means parsimonious of praise, or slow to make use of the
deference that was paid him, for the purpose of procuring justice to
merit.

It happened at one of those public meetings at which Mr. Falkland and
Mr. Tyrrel were present, that the conversation, in one of the most
numerous sets into which the company was broken, turned upon the
poetical talents of the former. A lady, who was present, and was
distinguished for the acuteness of her understanding, said, she had been
favoured with a sight of a poem he had just written, entitled _An Ode to
the Genius of Chivalry_, which appeared to her of exquisite merit. The
curiosity of the company was immediately excited, and the lady added,
she had a copy in her pocket, which was much at their service, provided
its being thus produced would not be disagreeable to the author. The
whole circle immediately entreated Mr. Falkland to comply with their
wishes, and Mr. Clare, who was one of the company, enforced their
petition. Nothing gave this gentleman so much pleasure as to have an
opportunity of witnessing and doing justice to the exhibition of
intellectual excellence. Mr. Falkland had no false modesty or
affectation, and therefore readily yielded his consent.

Mr. Tyrrel accidentally sat at the extremity of this circle. It cannot
be supposed that the turn the conversation had taken was by any means
agreeable to him. He appeared to wish to withdraw himself, but there
seemed to be some unknown power that, as it were by enchantment,
retained him in his place, and made him consent to drink to the dregs
the bitter potion which envy had prepared for him.

The poem was read to the rest of the company by Mr. Clare, whose
elocution was scarcely inferior to his other accomplishments.
Simplicity, discrimination, and energy constantly attended him in the
act of reading, and it is not easy to conceive a more refined delight
than fell to the lot of those who had the good fortune to be his
auditors. The beauties of Mr. Falkland's poem were accordingly exhibited
with every advantage. The successive passions of the author were
communicated to the hearer. What was impetuous, and what was solemn,
were delivered with a responsive feeling, and a flowing and unlaboured
tone. The pictures conjured up by the creative fancy of the poet were
placed full to view, at one time overwhelming the soul with
superstitious awe, and at another transporting it with luxuriant beauty.

The character of the hearers upon this occasion has already been
described. They were, for the most part, plain, unlettered, and of
little refinement. Poetry in general they read, when read at all, from
the mere force of imitation, and with few sensations of pleasure; but
this poem had a peculiar vein of glowing inspiration. This very poem
would probably have been seen by many of them with little effect; but
the accents of Mr. Clare carried it home to the heart. He ended: and, as
the countenances of his auditors had before sympathised with the
passions of the composition, so now they emulated each other in
declaring their approbation. Their sensations were of a sort to which
they were little accustomed. One spoke, and another followed by a sort
of uncontrollable impulse; and the rude and broken manner of their
commendations rendered them the more singular and remarkable. But what
was least to be endured was the behaviour of Mr. Clare. He returned the
manuscript to the lady from whom he had received it, and then,
addressing Mr. Falkland, said with emphasis and animation, "Ha! this is
as it should be. It is of the right stamp. I have seen too many hard
essays strained from the labour of a pedant, and pastoral ditties
distressed in lack of a meaning. They are such as you sir, that we want.
Do not forget, however, that the Muse was not given to add refinements
to idleness, but for the highest and most invaluable purposes. Act up to
the magnitude of your destiny."

A moment after, Mr. Clare quitted his seat, and with Mr. Falkland and
two or three more withdrew. As soon as they were gone, Mr. Tyrrel edged
further into the circle. He had sat silent so long that he seemed ready
to burst with gall and indignation. "Mighty pretty verses!" said he,
half talking to himself, and not addressing any particular person: "why,
ay, the verses are well enough. Damnation! I should like to know what a
ship-load of such stuff is good for."

"Why, surely," said the lady who had introduced Mr. Falkland's Ode on
the present occasion, "you must allow that poetry is an agreeable and
elegant amusement."

"Elegant, quotha!--Why, look at this Falkland! A puny bit of a thing! In
the devil's name, madam, do you think he would write poetry if he could
do any thing better?"

The conversation did not stop here. The lady expostulated. Several other
persons, fresh from the sensation they had felt, contributed their
share. Mr. Tyrrel grew more violent in his invectives, and found ease in
uttering them. The persons who were able in any degree to check his
vehemence were withdrawn. One speaker after another shrunk back into
silence, too timid to oppose, or too indolent to contend with, the
fierceness of his passion. He found the appearance of his old
ascendancy; but he felt its deceitfulness and uncertainty, and was
gloomily dissatisfied.

In his return from this assembly he was accompanied by a young man,
whom similitude of manners had rendered one of his principal confidents,
and whose road home was in part the same as his own. One might have
thought that Mr. Tyrrel had sufficiently vented his spleen in the
dialogue he had just been holding. But he was unable to dismiss from his
recollection the anguish he had endured. "Damn Falkland!" said he. "What
a pitiful scoundrel is here to make all this bustle about! But women and
fools always will be fools; there is no help for that! Those that set
them on have most to answer for; and most of all, Mr. Clare. He is a man
that ought to know something of the world, and past being duped by
gewgaws and tinsel. He seemed, too, to have some notion of things: I
should not have suspected him of hallooing to a cry of mongrels without
honesty or reason. But the world is all alike. Those that seem better
than their neighbours, are only more artful. They mean the same thing,
though they take a different road. He deceived me for a while, but it is
all out now. They are the makers of the mischief. Fools might blunder,
but they would not persist, if people that ought to set them right did
not encourage them to go wrong."

A few days after this adventure Mr. Tyrrel was surprised to receive a
visit from Mr. Falkland. Mr. Falkland proceeded, without ceremony, to
explain the motive of his coming.

"Mr. Tyrrel," said he, "I am come to have an amicable explanation with
you."

"Explanation! What is my offence?"

"None in the world, sir; and for that reason I conceive this the fittest
time to come to a right understanding."

"You are in a devil of a hurry, sir. Are you clear that this haste will
not mar, instead of make an understanding?"

"I think I am, sir. I have great faith in the purity of my intentions,
and I will not doubt, when you perceive the view with which I come, that
you will willingly co-operate with it."

"Mayhap, Mr. Falkland, we may not agree about that. One man thinks one
way, and another man thinks another. Mayhap I do not think I have any
great reason to be pleased with you already."

"It may be so. I cannot, however, charge myself with having given you
reason to be displeased."

"Well, sir, you have no right to put me out of humour with myself. If
you come to play upon me, and try what sort of a fellow you shall have
to deal with, damn me if you shall have any reason to hug yourself upon
the experiment."

"Nothing, sir, is more easy for us than to quarrel. If you desire that,
there is no fear that you will find opportunities."

"Damn me, sir, if I do not believe you are come to bully me."

"Mr. Tyrrel! sir--have a care!"

"Of what, sir!--Do you threaten me? Damn my soul! who are you? what do
you come here for?"

The fieriness of Mr. Tyrrel brought Mr. Falkland to his recollection.

"I am wrong," said he. "I confess it. I came for purposes of peace. With
that view I have taken the liberty to visit you. Whatever therefore
might be my feelings upon another occasion, I am bound to suppress them
now."

"Ho!--Well, sir: and what have you further to offer?"

"Mr. Tyrrel," proceeded Mr. Falkland, "you will readily imagine that
the cause that brought me was not a slight one. I would not have
troubled you with a visit, but for important reasons. My coming is a
pledge how deeply I am myself impressed with what I have to communicate.

"We are in a critical situation. We are upon the brink of a whirlpool
which, if once it get hold of us, will render all further deliberation
impotent. An unfortunate jealousy seems to have insinuated itself
between us, which I would willingly remove; and I come to ask your
assistance. We are both of us nice of temper; we are both apt to kindle,
and warm of resentment. Precaution in this stage can be dishonourable to
neither; the time may come when we shall wish we had employed it, and
find it too late. Why should we be enemies? Our tastes are different;
our pursuits need not interfere. We both of us amply possess the means
of happiness; We may be respected by all, and spend a long life of
tranquillity and enjoyment. Will it be wise in us to exchange this
prospect for the fruits of strife? A strife between persons with our
peculiarities and our weaknesses, includes consequences that I shudder
to think of. I fear, sir, that it is pregnant with death at least to one
of us, and with misfortune and remorse to the survivor."

"Upon my soul, you are a strange man! Why trouble me with your
prophecies and forebodings?"

"Because it is necessary to your happiness! Because it becomes me to
tell you of our danger now, rather than wait till my character will
allow this tranquillity no longer!

"By quarrelling we shall but imitate the great mass of mankind, who
could easily quarrel in our place. Let us do better. Let us show that we
have the magnanimity to contemn petty misunderstandings. By thus
judging we shall do ourselves most substantial honour. By a contrary
conduct we shall merely present a comedy for the amusement of our
acquaintance."

"Do you think so? there may be something in that. Damn me, if I consent
to be the jest of any man living."

"You are right, Mr. Tyrrel. Let us each act in the manner best
calculated to excite respect. We neither of us wish to change roads; let
us each suffer the other to pursue his own track unmolested. Be this our
compact; and by mutual forbearance let us preserve mutual peace."

Saying this, Mr. Falkland offered his hand to Mr. Tyrrel in token of
fellowship. But the gesture was too significant. The wayward rustic, who
seemed to have been somewhat impressed by what had preceded, taken as he
now was by surprise, shrunk back. Mr. Falkland was again ready to take
fire upon this new slight, but he checked himself.

"All this is very unaccountable," cried Mr. Tyrrel. "What the devil can
have made you so forward, if you had not some sly purpose to answer, by
which I am to be overreached?"

"My purpose," replied Mr. Falkland, "is a manly and an honest purpose.
Why should you refuse a proposition dictated by reason, and an equal
regard to the interest of each?"

Mr. Tyrrel had had an opportunity for pause, and fell back into his
habitual character.

"Well, sir, in all this I must own there is some frankness. Now I will
return you like for like. It is no matter how I came by it, my temper is
rough, and will not be controlled. Mayhap you may think it is a
weakness, but I do not desire to see it altered. Till you came, I found
myself very well: I liked my neighbours, and my neighbours humoured me.
But now the case is entirely altered; and, as long as I cannot stir
abroad without meeting with some mortification in which you are directly
or remotely concerned, I am determined to hate you. Now, sir, if you
will only go out of the county or the kingdom, to the devil if you
please, so as I may never hear of you any more, I will promise never to
quarrel with you as long as I live. Your rhymes and your rebusses, your
quirks and your conundrums, may then be every thing that is grand for
what I care."

"Mr. Tyrrel, be reasonable! Might not I as well desire you to leave the
county, as you desire me? I come to you, not as to a master, but an
equal. In the society of men we must have something to endure, as well
as to enjoy. No man must think that the world was made for him. Let us
take things as we find them; and accommodate ourselves as we can to
unavoidable circumstances."

"True, sir; all this is fine talking. But I return to my text: we are as
God made us. I am neither a philosopher nor a poet, to set out upon a
wild-goose chase of making myself a different man from what you find me.
As for consequences, what must be must be. As we brew we must bake. And
so, do you see? I shall not trouble myself about what is to be, but
stand up to it with a stout heart when it comes. Only this I can tell
you, that as long as I find you thrust into my dish every day I shall
hate you as bad as senna and valerian. And damn me, if I do not think I
hate you the more for coming to-day in this pragmatical way, when nobody
sent for you, on purpose to show how much wiser you are than all the
world besides."

"Mr. Tyrrel, I have done. I foresaw consequences, and came as a friend.
I had hoped that, by mutual explanation, we should have come to a better
understanding. I am disappointed; but, perhaps, when you coolly reflect
on what has passed, you will give me credit for my intentions, and think
that my proposal was not an unreasonable one."

Having said this, Mr. Falkland departed. Through the interview he, no
doubt, conducted himself in a way that did him peculiar credit. Yet the
warmth of his temper could not be entirely suppressed: and even when he
was most exemplary, there was an apparent loftiness in his manner that
was calculated to irritate; and the very grandeur with which he
suppressed his passions, operated indirectly as a taunt to his opponent.
The interview was prompted by the noblest sentiments; but it
unquestionably served to widen the breach it was intended to heal.

For Mr. Tyrrel, he had recourse to his old expedient, and unburthened
the tumult of his thoughts to his confidential friend. "This," cried he,
"is a new artifice of the fellow, to prove his imagined superiority. We
knew well enough that he had the gift of the gab. To be sure, if the
world were to be governed by words, he would be in the right box. Oh,
yes, he had it all hollow! But what signifies prating? Business must be
done in another guess way than that. I wonder what possessed me that I
did not kick him! But that is all to come. This is only a new debt
added to the score, which he shall one day richly pay. This Falkland
haunts me like a demon. I cannot wake but I think of him. I cannot sleep
but I see him. He poisons all my pleasures. I should be glad to see him
torn with tenter-hooks, and to grind his heart-strings with my teeth. I
shall know no joy till I see him ruined. There may be some things right
about him; but he is my perpetual torment. The thought of him hangs
like a dead weight upon my heart, and I have a right to shake it off.
Does he think I will feel all that I endure for nothing?"

In spite of the acerbity of Mr. Tyrrel's feelings, it is probable,
however, he did some justice to his rival. He regarded him, indeed, with
added dislike; but he no longer regarded him as a despicable foe. He
avoided his encounter; he forbore to treat him with random hostility; he
seemed to lie in wait for his victim, and to collect his venom for a
mortal assault.




CHAPTER V.


It was not long after that a malignant distemper broke out in the
neighbourhood, which proved fatal to many of the inhabitants, and was of
unexampled rapidity in its effects. One of the first persons that was
seized with it was Mr. Clare. It may be conceived, what grief and alarm
this incident spread through the vicinity. Mr. Clare was considered by
them as something more than mortal. The equanimity of his behaviour, his
unassuming carriage, his exuberant benevolence and goodness of heart,
joined with his talents, his inoffensive wit, and the comprehensiveness
of his intelligence, made him the idol of all that knew him. In the
scene of his rural retreat, at least, he had no enemy. All mourned the
danger that now threatened him. He appeared to have had the prospect of
long life, and of going down to his grave full of years and of honour.
Perhaps these appearances were deceitful. Perhaps the intellectual
efforts he had made, which were occasionally more sudden, violent, and
unintermitted, than a strict regard to health would have dictated, had
laid the seed of future disease. But a sanguine observer would
infallibly have predicted, that his temperate habits, activity of mind,
and unabated cheerfulness, would be able even to keep death at bay for a
time, and baffle the attacks of distemper, provided their approach were
not uncommonly rapid and violent. The general affliction, therefore, was
doubly pungent upon the present occasion.

But no one was so much affected as Mr. Falkland. Perhaps no man so well
understood the value of the life that was now at stake. He immediately
hastened to the spot; but he found some difficulty in gaining admission.
Mr. Clare, aware of the infectious nature of his disease, had given
directions that as few persons as possible should approach him. Mr.
Falkland sent up his name. He was told that he was included in the
general orders. He was not, however, of a temper to be easily repulsed;
he persisted with obstinacy, and at length carried his point, being only
reminded in the first instance to employ those precautions which
experience has proved most effectual for counteracting infection.

He found Mr. Clare in his bed-chamber, but not in bed. He was sitting in
his night-gown at a bureau near the window. His appearance was composed
and cheerful, but death was in his countenance. "I had a great
inclination, Falkland," said he, "not to have suffered you to come in;
and yet there is not a person in the world it could give me more
pleasure to see. But, upon second thoughts, I believe there are few
people that could run into a danger of this kind with a better prospect
of escaping. In your case, at least, the garrison will not, I trust, be
taken through the treachery of the commander. I cannot tell how it is
that I, who can preach wisdom to you, have myself been caught. But do
not be discouraged by my example. I had no notice of my danger, or I
would have acquitted myself better."

Mr. Falkland having once established himself in the apartment of his
friend, would upon no terms consent to retire. Mr. Clare considered that
there was perhaps less danger in this choice, than in the frequent
change from the extremes of a pure to a tainted air, and desisted from
expostulation. "Falkland," said he, "when you came in, I had just
finished making my will. I was not pleased with what I had formerly
drawn up upon that subject, and I did not choose in my present situation
to call in an attorney. In fact, it would be strange if a man of sense,
with pure and direct intentions, should not be able to perform such a
function for himself."

Mr. Clare continued to act in the same easy and disengaged manner as in
perfect health. To judge from the cheerfulness of his tone and the
firmness of his manner, the thought would never once have occurred that
he was dying. He walked, he reasoned, he jested, in a way that argued
the most perfect self-possession. But his appearance changed perceptibly
for the worse every quarter of an hour. Mr. Falkland kept his eye
perpetually fixed upon him, with mingled sentiments of anxiety and
admiration.

"Falkland," said he, after having appeared for a short period absorbed
in thought, "I feel that I am dying. This is a strange distemper of
mine. Yesterday I seemed in perfect health, and to-morrow I shall be an
insensible corpse. How curious is the line that separates life and death
to mortal men! To be at one moment active, gay, penetrating, with stores
of knowledge at one's command, capable of delighting, instructing, and
animating mankind, and the next, lifeless and loathsome, an incumbrance
upon the face of the earth! Such is the history of many men, and such
will be mine.

"I feel as if I had yet much to do in the world; but it will not be. I
must be contented with what is past. It is in vain that I muster all my
spirits to my heart. The enemy is too mighty and too merciless for me;
he will not give me time so much as to breathe. These things are not yet
at least in our power: they are parts of a great series that is
perpetually flowing. The general welfare, the great business of the
universe, will go on, though I bear no further share in promoting it.
That task is reserved for younger strengths, for you, Falkland, and such
as you. We should be contemptible indeed if the prospect of human
improvement did not yield us a pure and perfect delight, independently
of the question of our existing to partake of it. Mankind would have
little to envy to future ages, if they had all enjoyed a serenity as
perfect as mine has been for the latter half of my existence."

Mr. Clare sat up through the whole day, indulging himself in easy and
cheerful exertions, which were perhaps better calculated to refresh and
invigorate the frame, than if he had sought repose in its direct form.
Now and then he was visited with a sudden pang; but it was no sooner
felt, than he seemed to rise above it, and smiled at the impotence of
these attacks. They might destroy him, but they could not disturb. Three
or four times he was bedewed with profuse sweats; and these again were
succeeded by an extreme dryness and burning heat of the skin. He was
next covered with small livid spots: symptoms of shivering followed, but
these he drove away with a determined resolution. He then became
tranquil and composed, and, after some time, decided to go to bed, it
being already night. "Falkland," said he, pressing his hand, "the task
of dying is not so difficult as some imagine. When one looks back from
the brink of it, one wonders that so total a subversion can take place
at so easy a price."

He had now been some time in bed, and, as every thing was still, Mr.
Falkland hoped that he slept; but in that he was mistaken. Presently Mr.
Clare threw back the curtain, and looked in the countenance of his
friend. "I cannot sleep," said he. "No, if I could sleep, it would be
the same thing as to recover; and I am destined to have the worst in
this battle.

"Falkland, I have been thinking about you. I do not know any one whose
future usefulness I contemplate with greater hope. Take care of
yourself. Do not let the world be defrauded of your virtues. I am
acquainted with your weakness as well as your strength. You have an
impetuosity, and an impatience of imagined dishonour, that, if once set
wrong, may make you as eminently mischievous as you will otherwise be
useful. Think seriously of exterminating this error!

"But if I cannot, in the brief expostulation my present situation will
allow, produce this desirable change in you, there is at least one thing
I can do. I can put you upon your guard against a mischief I foresee to
be imminent. Beware of Mr. Tyrrel. Do not commit the mistake of
despising him as an unequal opponent. Petty causes may produce great
mischiefs. Mr. Tyrrel is boisterous, rugged, and unfeeling; and you are
too passionate, too acutely sensible of injury. It would be truly to be
lamented, if a man so inferior, so utterly unworthy to be compared with
you, should be capable of changing your whole history into misery and
guilt. I have a painful presentiment upon my heart, as if something
dreadful would reach you from that quarter. Think of this. I exact no
promise from you. I would not shackle you with the fetters of
superstition; I would have you governed by justice and reason."

Mr. Falkland was deeply affected with this expostulation. His sense of
the generous attention of Mr. Clare at such a moment, was so great as
almost to deprive him of utterance. He spoke in short sentences, and
with visible effort. "I will behave better," replied he. "Never fear me!
Your admonitions shall not be thrown away upon me."

Mr. Clare adverted to another subject. "I have made you my executor; you
will not refuse me this last office of friendship. It is but a short
time that I have had the happiness of knowing you; but in that short
time I have examined you well, and seen you thoroughly. Do not
disappoint the sanguine hope I have entertained!

"I have left some legacies. My former connections, while I lived amidst
the busy haunts of men, as many of them as were intimate, are all of
them dear to me. I have not had time to summon them about me upon the
present occasion, nor did I desire it. The remembrances of me will, I
hope, answer a better purpose than such as are usually thought of on
similar occasions."

Mr. Clare, having thus unburthened his mind, spoke no more for several
hours. Towards morning Mr. Falkland quietly withdrew the curtain, and
looked at the dying man. His eyes were open, and were now gently turned
towards his young friend. His countenance was sunk, and of a death-like
appearance. "I hope you are better," said Falkland in a half whisper, as
if afraid of disturbing him. Mr. Clare drew his hand from the
bed-clothes, and stretched it forward; Mr. Falkland advanced, and took
hold of it. "Much better," said Mr. Clare, in a voice inward and hardly
articulate; "the struggle is now over; I have finished my part;
farewell! remember!" These were his last words. He lived still a few
hours; his lips were sometimes seen to move; he expired without a groan.

Mr. Falkland had witnessed the scene with much anxiety. His hopes of a
favourable crisis, and his fear of disturbing the last moments of his
friend, had held him dumb. For the last half hour he had stood up, with
his eyes intently fixed upon Mr. Clare. He witnessed the last gasp, the
last little convulsive motion of the frame. He continued to look; he
sometimes imagined that he saw life renewed. At length he could deceive
himself no longer, and exclaimed with a distracted accent, "And is this
all?" He would have thrown himself upon the body of his friend; the
attendants withheld, and would have forced him into another apartment.
But he struggled from them, and hung fondly over the bed. "Is this the
end of genius, virtue, and excellence? Is the luminary of the world thus
for ever gone? Oh, yesterday! yesterday! Clare, why could not I have
died in your stead? Dreadful moment! Irreparable loss! Lost in the very
maturity and vigour of his mind! Cut off from a usefulness ten thousand
times greater than any he had already exhibited! Oh, his was a mind to
have instructed sages, and guided the moral world! This is all we have
left of him! The eloquence of those lips is gone! The incessant activity
of that heart is still! The best and wisest of men is gone, and the
world is insensible of its loss!"

Mr. Tyrrel heard the intelligence of Mr. Clare's death with emotion, but
of a different kind. He avowed that he had not forgiven him his partial
attachment to Mr. Falkland, and therefore could not recall his
remembrance with kindness. But if he could have overlooked his past
injustice, sufficient care, it seems, was taken to keep alive his
resentment. "Falkland, forsooth, attended him on his death-bed, as if
nobody else were worthy of his confidential communications." But what
was worst of all was this executorship. "In every thing this pragmatical
rascal throws me behind. Contemptible wretch, that has nothing of the
man about him! Must he perpetually trample upon his betters? Is every
body incapable of saying what kind of stuff a man is made of? caught
with mere outside? choosing the flimsy before the substantial? And upon
his death-bed too? [Mr. Tyrrel with his uncultivated brutality mixed, as
usually happens, certain rude notions of religion.] Sure the sense of
his situation might have shamed him. Poor wretch! his soul has a great
deal to answer for. He has made my pillow uneasy; and, whatever may be
the consequences, it is he we have to thank for them."

The death of Mr. Clare removed the person who could most effectually
have moderated the animosities of the contending parties, and took away
the great operative check upon the excesses of Mr. Tyrrel. This rustic
tyrant had been held in involuntary restraint by the intellectual
ascendancy of his celebrated neighbour: and, notwithstanding the general
ferocity of his temper, he did not appear till lately to have
entertained a hatred against him. In the short time that had elapsed
from the period in which Mr. Clare had fixed his residence in the
neighbourhood, to that of the arrival of Mr. Falkland from the
Continent, the conduct of Mr. Tyrrel had even shown tokens of
improvement. He would indeed have been better satisfied not to have had
even this intruder into a circle where he had been accustomed to reign.
But with Mr. Clare he could have no rivalship; the venerable character
of Mr. Clare disposed him to submission: this great man seemed to have
survived all the acrimony of contention, and all the jealous subtleties
of a mistaken honour.

The effects of Mr. Clare's suavity however, so far as related to Mr.
Tyrrel, had been in a certain degree suspended by considerations of
rivalship between this gentleman and Mr. Falkland. And, now that the
influence of Mr. Clare's presence and virtues was entirely removed, Mr.
Tyrrel's temper broke out into more criminal excesses than ever. The
added gloom which Mr. Falkland's neighbourhood inspired, overflowed upon
all his connections; and the new examples of his sullenness and tyranny
which every day afforded, reflected back upon this accumulated and
portentous feud.




CHAPTER VI.


The consequences of all this speedily manifested themselves. The very
next incident in the story was in some degree decisive of the
catastrophe. Hitherto I have spoken only of preliminary matters,
seemingly unconnected with each other, though leading to that state of
mind in both parties which had such fatal effects. But all that remains
is rapid and tremendous. The death-dealing mischief advances with an
accelerated motion, appearing to defy human wisdom and strength to
obstruct its operation.

The vices of Mr. Tyrrel, in their present state of augmentation, were
peculiarly exercised upon his domestics and dependents. But the
principal sufferer was the young lady mentioned on a former occasion,
the orphan daughter of his father's sister. Miss Melville's mother had
married imprudently, or rather unfortunately, against the consent of her
relations, all of whom had agreed to withdraw their countenance from her
in consequence of that precipitate step. Her husband had turned out to
be no better than an adventurer; had spent her fortune, which in
consequence of the irreconcilableness of her family was less than he
expected, and had broken her heart. Her infant daughter was left without
any resource. In this situation the representations of the people with
whom she happened to be placed, prevailed upon Mrs. Tyrrel, the mother
of the squire, to receive her into her family. In equity, perhaps, she
was entitled to that portion of fortune which her mother had forfeited
by her imprudence, and which had gone to swell the property of the male
representative. But this idea had never entered into the conceptions of
either mother or son. Mrs. Tyrrel conceived that she performed an act of
the most exalted benevolence in admitting Miss Emily into a sort of
equivocal situation, which was neither precisely that of a domestic, nor
yet marked with the treatment that might seem due to one of the family.

She had not, however, at first been sensible of all the mortifications
that might have been expected from her condition. Mrs. Tyrrel, though
proud and imperious, was not ill-natured. The female, who lived in the
family in the capacity of housekeeper, was a person who had seen better
days, and whose disposition was extremely upright and amiable. She early
contracted a friendship for the little Emily, who was indeed for the
most part committed to her care. Emily, on her side, fully repaid the
affection of her instructress, and learned with great docility the few
accomplishments Mrs. Jakeman was able to communicate. But most of all
she imbibed her cheerful and artless temper, that extracted the
agreeable and encouraging from all events, and prompted her to
communicate her sentiments, which were never of the cynical cast,
without modification or disguise. Besides the advantages Emily derived
from Mrs. Jakeman, she was permitted to take lessons from the masters
who were employed at Tyrrel Place for the instruction of her cousin; and
indeed, as the young gentleman was most frequently indisposed to attend
to them, they would commonly have had nothing to do, had it not been for
the fortunate presence of Miss Melville. Mrs. Tyrrel therefore
encouraged the studies of Emily on that score; in addition to which she
imagined that this living exhibition of instruction might operate as an
indirect allurement to her darling Barnabas, the only species of motive
she would suffer to be presented. Force she absolutely forbade; and of
the intrinsic allurements of literature and knowledge she had no
conception.

Emily, as she grew up, displayed an uncommon degree of sensibility,
which under her circumstances would have been a source of perpetual
dissatisfaction, had it not been qualified with an extreme sweetness and
easiness of temper. She was far from being entitled to the appellation
of a beauty. Her person was _petite_ and trivial; her complexion
savoured of the _brunette_; and her face was marked with the small-pox,
sufficiently to destroy its evenness and polish, though not enough to
destroy its expression. But, though her appearance was not beautiful, it
did not fail to be in a high degree engaging. Her complexion was at once
healthful and delicate; her long dark eye-brows adapted themselves with
facility to the various conceptions of her mind; and her looks bore the
united impression of an active discernment and a good-humoured
frankness. The instruction she had received, as it was entirely of a
casual nature, exempted her from the evils of untutored ignorance, but
not from a sort of native wildness, arguing a mind incapable of guile
itself, or of suspecting it in others. She amused, without seeming
conscious of the refined sense which her observations contained; or
rather, having never been debauched with applause, she set light by her
own qualifications, and talked from the pure gaiety of a youthful heart
acting upon the stores of a just understanding, and not with any
expectation of being distinguished and admired.

The death of her aunt made very little change in her situation. This
prudent lady, who would have thought it little less than sacrilege to
have considered Miss Melville as a branch of the stock of the Tyrrels,
took no more notice of her in her will than barely putting her down for
one hundred pounds in a catalogue of legacies to her servants. She had
never been admitted into the intimacy and confidence of Mrs. Tyrrel; and
the young squire, now that she was left under his sole protection,
seemed inclined to treat her with even more liberality than his mother
had done. He had seen her grow up under his eye, and therefore, though
there were but six years difference in their ages, he felt a kind of
paternal interest in her welfare. Habit had rendered her in a manner
necessary to him, and, in every recess from the occupations of the field
and the pleasures of the table, he found himself solitary and forlorn
without the society of Miss Melville. Nearness of kindred, and Emily's
want of personal beauty, prevented him from ever looking on her with the
eyes of desire. Her accomplishments were chiefly of the customary and
superficial kind, dancing and music. Her skill in the first led him
sometimes to indulge her with a vacant corner in his carriage, when he
went to the neighbouring assembly; and, in whatever light he might
himself think proper to regard her, he would have imagined his
chambermaid, introduced by him, entitled to an undoubted place in the
most splendid circle. Her musical talents were frequently employed for
his amusement. She had the honour occasionally of playing him to sleep
after the fatigues of the chase; and, as he had some relish for
harmonious sounds, she was frequently able to soothe him by their means
from the perturbations of which his gloomy disposition was so eminently
a slave. Upon the whole, she might be considered as in some sort his
favourite. She was the mediator to whom his tenants and domestics, when
they had incurred his displeasure, were accustomed to apply; the
privileged companion, that could approach this lion with impunity in the
midst of his roarings. She spoke to him without fear; her solicitations
were always good-natured and disinterested; and when he repulsed her, he
disarmed himself of half his terrors, and was contented to smile at her
presumption.

Such had been for some years the situation of Miss Melville. Its
precariousness had been beguiled by the uncommon forbearance with which
she was treated by her savage protector. But his disposition, always
brutal, had acquired a gradual accession of ferocity since the
settlement of Mr. Falkland in his neighbourhood. He now frequently
forgot the gentleness with which he had been accustomed to treat his
good-natured cousin. Her little playful arts were not always successful
in softening his rage; and he would sometimes turn upon her
blandishments with an impatient sternness that made her tremble. The
careless ease of her disposition, however, soon effaced these
impressions, and she fell without variation into her old habits.

A circumstance occurred about this time which gave peculiar strength to
the acrimony of Mr. Tyrrel, and ultimately brought to its close the
felicity that Miss Melville, in spite of the frowns of fortune, had
hitherto enjoyed. Emily was exactly seventeen when Mr. Falkland returned
from the continent. At this age she was peculiarly susceptible of the
charms of beauty, grace, and moral excellence, when united in a person
of the other sex. She was imprudent, precisely because her own heart was
incapable of guile. She had never yet felt the sting of the poverty to
which she was condemned, and had not reflected on the insuperable
distance that custom has placed between the opulent and the poorer
classes of the community. She beheld Mr. Falkland, whenever he was
thrown in her way at any of the public meetings, with admiration; and,
without having precisely explained to herself the sentiments she
indulged, her eyes followed him through all the changes of the scene,
with eagerness and impatience. She did not see him, as the rest of the
assembly did, born to one of the amplest estates in the county, and
qualified to assert his title to the richest heiress. She thought only
of Falkland, with those advantages which were most intimately his own,
and of which no persecution of adverse fortune had the ability to
deprive him. In a word, she was transported when he was present; he was
the perpetual subject of her reveries and her dreams; but his image
excited no sentiment in her mind beyond that of the immediate pleasure
she took in his idea.

The notice Mr. Falkland bestowed on her in return, appeared sufficiently
encouraging to a mind so full of prepossession as that of Emily. There
was a particular complacency in his looks when directed towards her. He
had said in a company, of which one of the persons present repeated his
remarks to Miss Melville, that she appeared to him amiable and
interesting; that he felt for her unprovided and destitute situation;
and that he should have been glad to be more particular in his attention
to her, had he not been apprehensive of doing her a prejudice in the
suspicious mind of Mr. Tyrrel. All this she considered as the ravishing
condescension of a superior nature; for, if she did not recollect with
sufficient assiduity his gifts of fortune, she was, on the other hand,
filled with reverence for his unrivalled accomplishments. But, while she
thus seemingly disclaimed all comparison between Mr. Falkland and
herself, she probably cherished a confused feeling as if some event,
that was yet in the womb of fate, might reconcile things apparently the
most incompatible. Fraught with these prepossessions, the civilities
that had once or twice occurred in the bustle of a public circle, the
restoring her fan which she had dropped, or the disembarrassing her of
an empty tea-cup, made her heart palpitate, and gave birth to the
wildest chimeras in her deluded imagination.

About this time an event happened, that helped to give a precise
determination to the fluctuations of Miss Melville's mind. One evening,
a short time after the death of Mr. Clare, Mr. Falkland had been at the
house of his deceased friend in his quality of executor, and, by some
accidents of little intrinsic importance, had been detained three or
four hours later than he expected. He did not set out upon his return
till two o'clock in the morning. At this time, in a situation so remote
from the metropolis, every thing is as silent as it would be in a
region wholly uninhabited. The moon shone bright; and the objects around
being marked with strong variations of light and shade, gave a kind of
sacred solemnity to the scene. Mr. Falkland had taken Collins with him,
the business to be settled at Mr. Clare's being in some respects similar
to that to which this faithful domestic had been accustomed in the
routine of his ordinary service. They had entered into some
conversation, for Mr. Falkland was not then in the habit of obliging the
persons about him by formality and reserve to recollect who he was. The
attractive solemnity of the scene made him break off the talk somewhat
abruptly, that he might enjoy it without interruption. They had not
ridden far, before a hollow wind seemed to rise at a distance, and they
could hear the hoarse roarings of the sea. Presently the sky on one side
assumed the appearance of a reddish brown, and a sudden angle in the
road placed this phenomenon directly before them. As they proceeded, it
became more distinct, and it was at length sufficiently visible that it
was occasioned by a fire. Mr. Falkland put spurs to his horse; and, as
they approached, the object presented every instant a more alarming
appearance. The flames ascended with fierceness; they embraced a large
portion of the horizon; and, as they carried up with them numerous
little fragments of the materials that fed them, impregnated with fire,
and of an extremely bright and luminous colour, they presented some
feeble image of the tremendous eruption of a volcano.

The flames proceeded from a village directly in their road. There were
eight or ten houses already on fire, and the whole seemed to be
threatened with immediate destruction. The inhabitants were in the
utmost consternation, having had no previous experience of a similar
calamity. They conveyed with haste their moveables and furniture into
the adjoining fields. When any of them had effected this as far as it
could be attempted with safety, they were unable to conceive any further
remedy, but stood wringing their hands, and contemplating the ravages of
the fire in an agony of powerless despair. The water that could be
procured, in any mode practised in that place, was but as a drop
contending with an element in arms. The wind in the mean time was
rising, and the flames spread with more and more rapidity.

Mr. Falkland contemplated this scene for a few moments, as if ruminating
with himself as to what could be done. He then directed some of the
country people about him to pull down a house, next to one that was
wholly on fire, but which itself was yet untouched. They seemed
astonished at a direction which implied a voluntary destruction of
property, and considered the task as too much in the heart of the danger
to be undertaken. Observing that they were motionless, he dismounted
from his horse, and called upon them in an authoritative voice to follow
him. He ascended the house in an instant, and presently appeared upon
the top of it, as if in the midst of the flames. Having, with the
assistance of two or three of the persons that followed him most
closely, and who by this time had supplied themselves with whatever
tools came next to hand, loosened the support of a stack of chimneys, he
pushed them headlong into the midst of the fire. He passed and repassed
along the roof; and, having set people to work in all parts, descended
in order to see what could be done in any other quarter. At this moment
an elderly woman burst from the midst of a house in flames: the utmost
consternation was painted in her looks; and, as soon as she could
recollect herself enough to have a proper idea of her situation, the
subject of her anxiety seemed, in an instant, to be totally changed.
"Where is my child?" cried she, and cast an anxious and piercing look
among the surrounding crowd. "Oh, she is lost! she is in the midst of
flames! Save her! save her! my child!" She filled the air with
heart-rending shrieks. She turned towards the house. The people that
were near endeavoured to prevent her, but she shook them off in a
moment. She entered the passage; viewed the hideous ruin; and was then
going to plunge into the blazing staircase. Mr. Falkland saw, pursued,
and seized her by the arm; it was Mrs. Jakeman. "Stop!" he cried, with a
voice of grand, yet benevolent authority. "Remain you in the street! I
will seek, and will save her!" Mrs. Jakeman obeyed. He charged the
persons who were near to detain her; he enquired which was the apartment
of Emily. Mrs. Jakeman was upon a visit to a sister who lived in the
village, and had brought Emily along with her. Mr. Falkland ascended a
neighbouring house, and entered that in which Emily was, by a window in
the roof.

He found her already awaked from her sleep; and, becoming sensible of
her danger, she had that instant wrapped a loose gown round her. Such is
the almost irresistible result of feminine habits; but, having done
this, she examined the surrounding objects with the wildness of despair.
Mr. Falkland entered the chamber. She flew into his arms with the
rapidity of lightning. She embraced and clung to him, with an impulse
that did not wait to consult the dictates of her understanding. Her
emotions were indescribable. In a few short moments she had lived an age
in love. In two minutes Mr. Falkland was again in the street with his
lovely, half-naked burthen in his arms. Having restored her to her
affectionate protector, snatched from the immediate grasp of death, from
which, if he had not, none would have delivered her, he returned to his
former task. By his presence of mind, by his indefatigable humanity and
incessant exertions, he saved three fourths of the village from
destruction.

The conflagration being at length abated, he sought again Mrs. Jakeman
and Emily, who by this time had obtained a substitute for the garments
she had lost in the fire. He displayed the tenderest solicitude for the
young lady's safety, and directed Collins to go with as much speed as he
could, and send his chariot to attend her. More than an hour elapsed in
this interval. Miss Melville had never seen so much of Mr. Falkland upon
any former occasion; and the spectacle of such humanity, delicacy,
firmness, and justice in the form of man, as he crowded into this small
space, was altogether new to her, and in the highest degree fascinating.
She had a confused feeling as if there had been something indecorous in
her behaviour or appearance, when Mr. Falkland had appeared to her
relief; and this combined with her other emotions to render the whole
critical and intoxicating.

Emily no sooner arrived at the family mansion, than Mr. Tyrrel ran out
to receive her. He had just heard of the melancholy accident that had
taken place at the village, and was terrified for the safety of his
good-humoured cousin. He displayed those unpremeditated emotions which
are common to almost every individual of the human race. He was greatly
shocked at the suspicion that Emily might possibly have become the
victim of a catastrophe which had thus broken out in the dead of night.
His sensations were of the most pleasing sort when he folded her in his
arms, and fearful apprehension was instantaneously converted into
joyous certainty. Emily no sooner entered under the well known roof than
her spirits were brisk, and her tongue incessant in describing her
danger and her deliverance. Mr. Tyrrel had formerly been tortured with
the innocent eulogiums she pronounced of Mr. Falkland. But these were
lameness itself, compared with the rich and various eloquence that now
flowed from her lips. Love had not the same effect upon her, especially
at the present moment, which it would have had upon a person instructed
to feign a blush, and inured to a consciousness of wrong. She described
his activity and resources, the promptitude with which every thing was
conceived, and the cautious but daring wisdom with which it was
executed. All was fairy-land and enchantment in the tenour of her
artless tale; you saw a beneficent genius surveying and controlling the
whole, but could have no notion of any human means by which his purposes
were effected.

Mr. Tyrrel listened for a while to these innocent effusions with
patience; he could even bear to hear the man applauded, by whom he had
just obtained so considerable a benefit. But the theme by amplification
became nauseous, and he at length with some roughness put an end to the
tale. Probably, upon recollection, it appeared still more insolent and
intolerable than while it was passing; the sensation of gratitude wore
off, but the hyperbolical praise that had been bestowed still haunted
his memory, and sounded in his ear;--Emily had entered into the
confederacy that disturbed his repose. For herself, she was wholly
unconscious of offence, and upon every occasion quoted Mr. Falkland as
the model of elegant manners and true wisdom. She was a total stranger
to dissimulation; and she could not conceive that any one beheld the
subject of her admiration with less partiality than herself. Her
artless love became more fervent than ever. She flattered herself that
nothing less than a reciprocal passion could have prompted Mr. Falkland
to the desperate attempt of saving her from the flames; and she trusted
that this passion would speedily declare itself, as well as induce the
object of her adoration to overlook her comparative unworthiness.

Mr. Tyrrel endeavoured at first with some moderation to check Miss
Melville in her applauses, and to convince her by various tokens that
the subject was disagreeable to him. He was accustomed to treat her with
kindness. Emily, on her part, was disposed to yield an unreluctant
obedience, and therefore it was not difficult to restrain her. But upon
the very next occasion her favourite topic would force its way to her
lips. Her obedience was the acquiescence of a frank and benevolent
heart; but it was the most difficult thing in the world to inspire her
with fear. Conscious herself that she would not hurt a worm, she could
not conceive that any one would harbour cruelty and rancour against her.
Her temper had preserved her from obstinate contention with the persons
under whose protection she was placed; and, as her compliance was
unhesitating, she had no experience of a severe and rigorous treatment.
As Mr. Tyrrel's objection to the very name of Falkland became more
palpable and uniform, Miss Melville increased in her precaution. She
would stop herself in the half-pronounced sentences that were meant to
his praise. This circumstance had necessarily an ungracious effect; it
was a cutting satire upon the imbecility of her kinsman. Upon these
occasions she would sometimes venture upon a good-humoured
expostulation:--"Dear sir! well, I wonder how you can be so ill-natured!
I am sure Mr. Falkland would do you any good office in the
world:"--till she was checked by some gesture of impatience and
fierceness.

At length she wholly conquered her heedlessness and inattention. But it
was too late. Mr. Tyrrel already suspected the existence of that passion
which she had thoughtlessly imbibed. His imagination, ingenious in
torment, suggested to him all the different openings in conversation, in
which she would have introduced the praise of Mr. Falkland, had she not
been placed under this unnatural restraint. Her present reserve upon the
subject was even more insufferable than her former loquacity. All his
kindness for this unhappy orphan gradually subsided. Her partiality for
the man who was the object of his unbounded abhorrence, appeared to him
as the last persecution of a malicious destiny. He figured himself as
about to be deserted by every creature in human form; all men, under the
influence of a fatal enchantment, approving only what was sophisticated
and artificial, and holding the rude and genuine offspring of nature in
mortal antipathy. Impressed with these gloomy presages, he saw Miss
Melville with no sentiments but those of rancorous aversion; and,
accustomed as he was to the uncontrolled indulgence of his propensities,
he determined to wreak upon her a signal revenge.




CHAPTER VII.


Mr. Tyrrel consulted his old confident respecting the plan he should
pursue; who, sympathising as he did in the brutality and insolence of
his friend, had no idea that an insignificant girl, without either
wealth or beauty, ought to be allowed for a moment to stand in the way
of the gratifications of a man of Mr. Tyrrel's importance. The first
idea of her now unrelenting kinsman was to thrust her from his doors,
and leave her to seek her bread as she could. But he was conscious that
this proceeding would involve him in considerable obloquy; and he at
length fixed upon a scheme which, at the same time that he believed it
would sufficiently shelter his reputation, would much more certainly
secure her mortification and punishment.

For this purpose he fixed upon a young man of twenty, the son of one
Grimes, who occupied a small farm, the property of his confident. This
fellow he resolved to impose as a husband on Miss Melville, who, he
shrewdly suspected, guided by the tender sentiments she had
unfortunately conceived for Mr. Falkland, would listen with reluctance
to any matrimonial proposal. Grimes he selected as being in all respects
the diametrical reverse of Mr. Falkland. He was not precisely a lad of
vicious propensities, but in an inconceivable degree boorish and
uncouth. His complexion was scarcely human; his features were coarse,
and strangely discordant and disjointed from each other. His lips were
thick, and the tone of his voice broad and unmodulated. His legs were of
equal size from one end to the other, and his feet misshapen and clumsy.
He had nothing spiteful or malicious in his disposition, but he was a
total stranger to tenderness; he could not feel for those refinements in
others, of which he had no experience in himself. He was an expert
boxer: his inclination led him to such amusements as were most
boisterous; and he delighted in a sort of manual sarcasm, which he could
not conceive to be very injurious, as it left no traces behind it. His
general manners were noisy and obstreperous; inattentive to others; and
obstinate and unyielding, not from any cruelty and ruggedness of
temper, but from an incapacity to conceive those finer feelings, that
make so large a part of the history of persons who are cast in a gentler
mould.

Such was the uncouth and half-civilised animal, which the industrious
malice of Mr. Tyrrel fixed upon as most happily adapted to his purpose.
Emily had hitherto been in an unusual degree exempted from the
oppression of despotism. Her happy insignificance had served her as a
protection. No one thought it worth his while to fetter her with those
numerous petty restrictions with which the daughters of opulence are
commonly tormented. She had the wildness, as well as the delicate frame,
of the bird that warbles unmolested in its native groves.

When therefore she heard from her kinsman the proposal of Mr. Grimes for
a husband, she was for a moment silent with astonishment at so
unexpected a suggestion. But as soon as she recovered her speech, she
replied, "No, sir, I do not want a husband."

"You do! Are not you always hankering after the men? It is high time you
should be settled."

"Mr. Grimes! No, indeed! when I do have a husband, it shall not be such
a man as Mr. Grimes neither."

"Be silent! How dare you give yourself such unaccountable liberties?"

"Lord, I wonder what I should do with him. You might as well give me
your great rough water-dog, and bid me make him a silk cushion to lie in
my dressing-room. Besides, sir, Grimes is a common labouring man, and I
am sure I have always heard my aunt say that ours is a very great
family."

"It is a lie! Our family! have you the impudence to think yourself one
of our family?"

"Why, sir, was not your grandpapa my grandpapa? How then can we be of a
different family?"

"From the strongest reason in the world. You are the daughter of a
rascally Scotchman, who spent every shilling of my aunt Lucy's fortune,
and left you a beggar. You have got an hundred pounds, and Grimes's
father promises to give him as much. How dare you look down upon your
equals?"

"Indeed, sir, I am not proud. But, indeed and indeed, I can never love
Mr. Grimes. I am very happy as I am: why should I be married?"

"Silence your prating! Grimes will be here this afternoon. Look that you
behave well to him. If you do not, he will remember and repay, when you
least like it."

"Nay, I am sure, sir--you are not in earnest?"

"Not in earnest! Damn me, but we will see that. I can tell what you
would be at. You had rather be Mr. Falkland's miss, than the wife of a
plain downright yeoman. But I shall take care of you.--Ay, this comes of
indulgence. You must be taken down, miss. You must be taught the
difference between high-flown notions and realities. Mayhap you may take
it a little in dudgeon or so; but never mind that. Pride always wants a
little smarting. If you should be brought to shame, it is I that shall
bear the blame of it."

The tone in which Mr. Tyrrel spoke was so different from any thing to
which Miss Melville had been accustomed, that she felt herself wholly
unable to determine what construction to put upon it. Sometimes she
thought he had really formed a plan for imposing upon her a condition
that she could not bear so much as to think of. But presently she
rejected this idea as an unworthy imputation upon her kinsman, and
concluded that it was only his way, and that all he meant was to try
her. To be resolved however, she determined to consult her constant
adviser, Mrs. Jakeman, and accordingly repeated to her what had passed.
Mrs. Jakeman saw the whole in a very different light from that in which
Emily had conceived it, and trembled for the future peace of her beloved
ward.

"Lord bless me, my dear mamma!" cried Emily, (this was the appellation
she delighted to bestow upon the good housekeeper,) "you cannot think
so? But I do not care. I will never marry Grimes, happen what will."

"But how will you help yourself? My master will oblige you."

"Nay, now you think you are talking to a child indeed. It is I am to
have the man, not Mr. Tyrrel. Do you think I will let any body else
choose a husband for me? I am not such a fool as that neither."

"Ah, Emily! you little know the disadvantages of your situation. Your
cousin is a violent man, and perhaps will turn you out of doors, if you
oppose him."

"Oh, mamma! it is very wicked of you to say so. I am sure Mr. Tyrrel is
a very good man, though he be a little cross now and then. He knows very
well that I am right to have a will of my own in such a thing as this,
and nobody is punished for doing what is right."

"Nobody ought, my dear child. But there are very wicked and tyrannical
men in the world."

"Well, well, I will never believe my cousin is one of these."

"I hope he is not."

"And if he were, what then? To be sure I should he very sorry to make
him angry."

"What then! Why then my poor Emily would be a beggar. Do you think I
could bear to see that?"

"No, no. Mr. Tyrrel has just told me that I have a hundred pounds. But
if I had no fortune, is not that the case with a thousand other folks?
Why should I grieve, for what they bear and are merry? Do not make
yourself uneasy, mamma. I am determined that I will do any thing rather
than marry Grimes; that is what I will."

Mrs. Jakeman could not bear the uneasy state of suspense in which this
conversation left her mind, and went immediately to the squire to have
her doubts resolved. The manner in which she proposed the question,
sufficiently indicated the judgment she had formed of the match.

"That is true," said Mr. Tyrrel, "I wanted to speak to you about this
affair. The girl has got unaccountable notions in her head, that will be
the ruin of her. You perhaps can tell where she had them. But, be that
as it will, it is high time something should be done. The shortest way
is the best, and to keep things well while they are well. In short, I am
determined she shall marry this lad: you do not know any harm of him, do
you? You have a good deal of influence with her, and I desire, do you
see, that you will employ it to lead her to her good: you had best, I
can tell you. She is a pert vixen! By and by she would be a whore, and
at last no better than a common trull, and rot upon a dunghill, if I
were not at all these pains to save her from destruction. I would make
her an honest farmer's wife, and my pretty miss cannot bear the thoughts
of it!"

In the afternoon Grimes came according to appointment, and was left
alone with the young lady.

"Well, miss," said he, "it seems the squire has a mind to make us man
and wife. For my part, I cannot say I should have thought of it. But,
being as how the squire has broke the ice, if so be as you like of the
match, why I am your man. Speak the word; a nod is as good as a wink to
a blind horse."

Emily was already sufficiently mortified at the unexpected proposal of
Mr. Tyrrel. She was confounded at the novelty of the situation, and
still more at the uncultivated rudeness of her lover, which even
exceeded her expectation. This confusion was interpreted by Grimes into
diffidence.

"Come, come, never be cast down. Put a good face upon it. What though?
My first sweetheart was Bet Butterfield, but what of that? What must be
must be; grief will never fill the belly. She was a fine strapping
wench, that is the truth of it! five foot ten inches, and as stout as a
trooper. Oh, she would do a power of work! Up early and down late;
milked ten cows with her own hands; on with her cardinal, rode to market
between her panniers, fair weather and foul, hail, blow, or snow. It
would have done your heart good to have seen her frost-bitten cheeks, as
red as a beefen from her own orchard! Ah! she was a maid of mettle;
would romp with the harvestmen, slap one upon the back, wrestle with
another, and had a rogue's trick and a joke for all round. Poor girl!
she broke her neck down stairs at a christening. To be sure I shall
never meet with her fellow! But never you mind that; I do not doubt that
I shall find more in you upon further acquaintance. As coy and bashful
as you seem, I dare say you are rogue enough at bottom. When I have
touzled and rumpled you a little, we shall see. I am no chicken, miss,
whatever you may think. I know what is what, and can see as far into a
millstone as another. Ay, ay; you will come to. The fish will snap at
the bait, never doubt it. Yes, yes, we shall rub on main well together."

Emily by this time had in some degree mustered up her spirits, and
began, though with hesitation, to thank Mr. Grimes for his good opinion,
but to confess that she could never be brought to favour his addresses.
She therefore entreated him to desist from all further application. This
remonstrance on her part would have become more intelligible, had it not
been for his boisterous manners and extravagant cheerfulness, which
indisposed him to silence, and made him suppose that at half a word he
had sufficient intimation of another's meaning. Mr. Tyrrel, in the mean
time, was too impatient not to interrupt the scene before they could
have time to proceed far in explanation; and he was studious in the
sequel to prevent the young folks from being too intimately acquainted
with each other's inclinations. Grimes, of consequence, attributed the
reluctance of Miss Melville to maiden coyness, and the skittish shyness
of an unbroken filly. Indeed, had it been otherwise, it is not probable
that it would have made any effectual impression upon him; as he was
always accustomed to consider women as made for the recreation of the
men, and to exclaim against the weakness of people who taught them to
imagine they were to judge for themselves.

As the suit proceeded, and Miss Melville saw more of her new admirer,
her antipathy increased. But, though her character was unspoiled by
those false wants, which frequently make people of family miserable
while they have every thing that nature requires within their reach, yet
she had been little used to opposition, and was terrified at the growing
sternness of her kinsman. Sometimes she thought of flying from a house
which was now become her dungeon; but the habits of her youth, and her
ignorance of the world, made her shrink from this project, when she
contemplated it more nearly, Mrs. Jakeman, indeed, could not think with
patience of young Grimes as a husband for her darling Emily; but her
prudence determined her to resist with all her might the idea on the
part of the young lady of proceeding to extremities. She could not
believe that Mr. Tyrrel would persist in such an unaccountable
persecution, and she exhorted Miss Melville to forget for a moment the
unaffected independence of her character, and pathetically to deprecate
her cousin's obstinacy. She had great confidence in the ingenuous
eloquence of her ward. Mrs. Jakeman did not know what was passing in the
breast of the tyrant.

Miss Melville complied with the suggestion of her mamma. One morning
immediately after breakfast, she went to her harpsichord, and played one
after another several of those airs that were most the favourites of Mr.
Tyrrel. Mrs. Jakeman had retired; the servants were gone to their
respective employments. Mr. Tyrrel would have gone also; his mind was
untuned, and he did not take the pleasure he had been accustomed to take
in the musical performances of Emily. But her finger was now more
tasteful than common. Her mind was probably wrought up to a firmer and
bolder tone, by the recollection of the cause she was going to plead; at
the same time that it was exempt from those incapacitating tremors which
would have been felt by one that dared not look poverty in the face. Mr.
Tyrrel was unable to leave the apartment. Sometimes he traversed it with
impatient steps; then he hung over the poor innocent whose powers were
exerted to please him; at length he threw himself in a chair opposite,
with his eyes turned towards Emily. It was easy to trace the progress of
his emotions. The furrows into which his countenance was contracted were
gradually relaxed; his features were brightened into a smile; the
kindness with which he had upon former occasions contemplated Emily
seemed to revive in his heart.

Emily watched her opportunity. As soon as she had finished one of the
pieces, she rose and went to Mr. Tyrrel.

"Now, have not I done it nicely? and after this will not you give me a
reward?"

"A reward! Ay, come here, and I will give you a kiss."

"No, that is not it. And yet you have not kissed me this many a day.
Formerly you said you loved me, and called me your Emily. I am sure you
did not love me better than I loved you. You have not forgot all the
kindness you once had for me?" added she anxiously.

"Forgot? No, no. How can you ask such a question? You shall be my dear
Emily still!"

"Ah, those were happy times!" she replied, a little mournfully. "Do you
know, cousin, I wish I could wake, and find that the last month--only
about a month--was a dream?"

"What do you mean by that?" said Mr. Tyrrel with an altered voice. "Have
a care! Do not put me out of humour. Do not come with your romantic
notions now."

"No, no: I have no romantic notions in my head. I speak of something
upon which the happiness of my life depends."

"I see what you would be at. Be silent. You know it is to no purpose to
plague me with your stubbornness. You will not let me be in good humour
with you for a moment. What my mind is determined upon about Grimes, all
the world shall not move me to give up."

"Dear, dear cousin! why, but consider now. Grimes is a rough rustic
lout, like Orson in the story-book. He wants a wife like himself. He
would be as uneasy and as much at a loss with me, as I with him. Why
should we both of us be forced to do what neither of us is inclined to?
I cannot think what could ever have put it into your head. But now, for
goodness' sake, give it up! Marriage is a serious thing. You should not
think of joining two people for a whim, who are neither of them fit for
one another in any respect in the world. We should feel mortified and
disappointed all our lives. Month would go after month, and year after
year, and I could never hope to be my own, but by the death of a person
I ought to love. I am sure, sir, you cannot mean me all this harm. What
have I done, that I should deserve to have you for an enemy?"

"I am not your enemy. I tell you that it is necessary to put you out of
harm's way. But, if I were your enemy, I could not be a worse torment to
you than you are to me. Are not you continually singing the praises of
Falkland? Are not you in love with Falkland? That man is a legion of
devils to me! I might as well have been a beggar! I might as well have
been a dwarf or a monster! Time was when I was thought entitled to
respect. But now, debauched by this Frenchified rascal, they call me
rude, surly, a tyrant! It is true that I cannot talk in finical phrases,
flatter people with hypocritical praise, or suppress the real feelings
of my mind. The scoundrel knows his pitiful advantages, and insults me
upon them without ceasing. He is my rival and my persecutor; and, at
last, as if all this were not enough, he has found means to spread the
pestilence in my own family. You, whom we took up out of charity, the
chance-born brat of a stolen marriage! you must turn upon your
benefactor, and wound me in the point that of all others I could least
bear. If I were your enemy, should not I have reason? Could I ever
inflict upon you such injuries as you have made me suffer? And who are
you? The lives of fifty such cannot atone for an hour of my uneasiness.
If you were to linger for twenty years upon the rack, you would never
feel what I have felt. But I am your friend. I see which way you are
going; and I am determined to save you from this thief, this
hypocritical destroyer of us all. Every moment that the mischief is left
to itself, it does but make bad worse; and I am determined to save you
out of hand."

The angry expostulations of Mr. Tyrrel suggested new ideas to the tender
mind of Miss Melville. He had never confessed the emotions of his soul
so explicitly before; but the tempest of his thoughts suffered him to be
no longer master of himself. She saw with astonishment that he was the
irreconcilable foe of Mr. Falkland, whom she had fondly imagined it was
the same thing to know and admire; and that he harboured a deep and
rooted resentment against herself. She recoiled, without well knowing
why, before the ferocious passions of her kinsman, and was convinced
that she had nothing to hope from his implacable temper. But her alarm
was the prelude of firmness, and not of cowardice.

"No, sir," replied she, "indeed I will not be driven any way that you
happen to like. I have been used to obey you, and, in all that is
reasonable, I will obey you still. But you urge me too far. What do you
tell me of Mr. Falkland? Have I ever done any thing to deserve your
unkind suspicions? I am innocent, and will continue innocent. Mr. Grimes
is well enough, and will no doubt find women that like him; but he is
not fit for me, and torture shall not force me to be his wife."

Mr. Tyrrel was not a little astonished at the spirit which Emily
displayed upon this occasion. He had calculated too securely upon the
general mildness and suavity of her disposition. He now endeavoured to
qualify the harshness of his former sentiments.

"God damn my soul! And so you can scold, can you? You expect every body
to turn out of his way, and fetch and carry, just as you please? I could
find in my heart--But you know my mind. I insist upon it that you let
Grimes court you, and that you lay aside your sulks, and give him a fair
hearing. Will you do that? If then you persist in your wilfulness, why
there, I suppose, is an end of the matter. Do not think that any body is
going to marry you, whether you will or no. You are no such mighty
prize, I assure you. If you knew your own interest, you would be glad to
take the young fellow while he is willing."

Miss Melville rejoiced in the prospect, which the last words of her
kinsman afforded her, of a termination at no great distance to her
present persecutions. Mrs. Jakeman, to whom she communicated them,
congratulated Emily on the returning moderation and good sense of the
squire, and herself on her prudence in having urged the young lady to
this happy expostulation. But their mutual felicitations lasted not
long. Mr. Tyrrel informed Mrs. Jakeman of the necessity in which he
found himself of sending her to a distance, upon a business which would
not fail to detain her several weeks; and, though the errand by no means
wore an artificial or ambiguous face, the two friends drew a melancholy
presage from this ill-timed separation. Mrs. Jakeman, in the mean time,
exhorted her ward to persevere, reminded her of the compunction which
had already been manifested by her kinsman, and encouraged her to hope
every thing from her courage and good temper. Emily, on her part, though
grieved at the absence of her protector and counsellor at so interesting
a crisis, was unable to suspect Mr. Tyrrel of such a degree either of
malice or duplicity as could afford ground for serious alarm. She
congratulated herself upon her delivery from so alarming a persecution,
and drew a prognostic of future success from this happy termination of
the first serious affair of her life. She exchanged a state of fortitude
and alarm for her former pleasing dreams respecting Mr. Falkland. These
she bore without impatience. She was even taught by the uncertainty of
the event to desire to prolong, rather than abridge, a situation which
might be delusive, but which was not without its pleasures.




CHAPTER VIII.


Nothing could be further from Mr. Tyrrel's intention than to suffer his
project to be thus terminated. No sooner was he freed from the fear of
his housekeeper's interference, than he changed the whole system of his
conduct. He ordered Miss Melville to be closely confined to her
apartment, and deprived of all means of communicating her situation to
any one out of his own house. He placed over her a female servant, in
whose discretion he could confide, and who, having formerly been
honoured with the amorous notices of the squire, considered the
distinctions that were paid to Emily at Tyrrel Place as an usurpation
upon her more reasonable claims. The squire himself did every thing in
his power to blast the young lady's reputation, and represented to his
attendants these precautions as necessary, to prevent her from eloping
to his neighbour, and plunging herself in total ruin.

As soon as Miss Melville had been twenty-four hours in durance, and
there was some reason to suppose that her spirit might be subdued to the
emergency of her situation, Mr. Tyrrel thought proper to go to her, to
explain the grounds of her present treatment, and acquaint her with the
only means by which she could hope for a change. Emily no sooner saw
him, than she turned towards him with an air of greater firmness than
perhaps she had ever assumed in her life, and accosted him thus:--

"Well, sir, is it you? I wanted to see you. It seems I am shut up here
by your orders. What does this mean? What right have you to make a
prisoner of me? What do I owe you? Your mother left me a hundred pounds:
have you ever offered to make any addition to my fortune? But, if you
had, I do not want it. I do not pretend to be better than the children
of other poor parents; I can maintain myself as they do. I prefer
liberty to wealth. I see you are surprised at the resolution I exert.
But ought I not to turn again, when I am trampled upon? I should have
left you before now, if Mrs. Jakeman had not over-persuaded me, and if I
had not thought better of you than by your present behaviour I find you
deserve. But now, sir, I intend to leave your house this moment, and
insist upon it, that you do not endeavour to prevent me."

Thus saying, she rose, and went towards the door, while Mr. Tyrrel stood
thunderstruck at her magnanimity. Seeing, however, that she was upon the
point of being out of the reach of his power, he recovered himself and
pulled her back.

"What is in the wind now? Do you think, strumpet; that you shall get
the better of me by sheer impudence? Sit down! rest you satisfied!--So
you want to know by what right you are here, do you? By the right of
possession. This house is mine, and you are in my power. There is no
Mrs. Jakeman now to spirit you away; no, nor no Falkland to bully for
you. I have countermined you, damn me! and blown up your schemes. Do you
think I will be contradicted and opposed for nothing? When did you ever
know any body resist my will without being made to repent? And shall I
now be browbeaten by a chitty-faced girl?--I have not given you a
fortune! Damn you! who brought you up? I will make you a bill for
clothing and lodging. Do not you know that every creditor has a right to
stop his runaway debtor. You may think as you please; but here you are
till you marry Grimes. Heaven and earth shall not prevent but I will get
the better of your obstinacy!"

"Ungenerous, unmerciful man! and so it is enough for you that I have
nobody to defend me! But I am not so helpless as you may imagine. You
may imprison my body, but you cannot conquer my mind. Marry Mr. Grimes!
And is this the way to bring me to your purpose? Every hardship I suffer
puts still further distant the end for which I am thus unjustly treated.
You are not used to have your will contradicted! When did I ever
contradict it? And, in a concern that is so completely my own, shall my
will go for nothing? Would you lay down this rule for yourself, and
suffer no other creature to take the benefit of it? I want nothing of
you: how dare you refuse me the privilege of a reasonable being, to live
unmolested in poverty and innocence? What sort of a man do you show
yourself, you that lay claim to the respect and applause of every one
that knows you?"

The spirited reproaches of Emily had at first the effect to fill Mr.
Tyrrel with astonishment, and make him feel abashed and overawed in the
presence of this unprotected innocent. But his confusion was the result
of surprise. When the first emotion wore off, he cursed himself for
being moved by her expostulations; and was ten times more exasperated
against her, for daring to defy his resentment at a time when she had
every thing to fear. His despotic and unforgiving propensities
stimulated him to a degree little short of madness. At the same time his
habits, which were pensive and gloomy, led him to meditate a variety of
schemes to punish her obstinacy. He began to suspect that there was
little hope of succeeding by open force, and therefore determined to
have recourse to treachery.

He found in Grimes an instrument sufficiently adapted to his purpose.
This fellow, without an atom of intentional malice, was fitted, by the
mere coarseness of his perceptions, for the perpetration of the greatest
injuries. He regarded both injury and advantage merely as they related
to the gratifications of appetite; and considered it an essential in
true wisdom, to treat with insult the effeminacy of those who suffer
themselves to be tormented with ideal misfortunes. He believed that no
happier destiny could befal a young woman than to be his wife; and he
conceived that that termination would amply compensate for any
calamities she might suppose herself to undergo in the interval. He was
therefore easily prevailed upon, by certain temptations which Mr. Tyrrel
knew how to employ, to take part in the plot into which Miss Melville
was meant to be betrayed.

Matters being thus prepared, Mr. Tyrrel proceeded, through the means of
the gaoler (for the experience he already had of personal discussion did
not incline him to repeat his visits), to play upon the fears of his
prisoner. This woman, sometimes under the pretence of friendship, and
sometimes with open malice, informed Emily, from time to time, of the
preparations that were making for her marriage. One day, "the squire had
rode over to look at a neat little farm which was destined for the
habitation of the new-married couple;" and at another, "a quantity of
live stock and household furniture was procured, that every thing might
be ready for their reception." She then told her "of a licence that was
bought, a parson in readiness, and a day fixed for the nuptials." When
Emily endeavoured, though with increased misgivings, to ridicule these
proceedings as absolutely nugatory without her consent, her artful
gouvernante related several stories of forced marriages, and assured her
that neither protestations, nor silence, nor fainting, would be of any
avail, either to suspend the ceremony, or to set it aside when
performed.

The situation of Miss Melville was in an eminent degree pitiable. She
had no intercourse but with her persecutors. She had not a human being
with whom to consult, who might afford her the smallest degree of
consolation and encouragement. She had fortitude; but it was neither
confirmed nor directed by the dictates of experience. It could not
therefore be expected to be so inflexible, as with better information it
would, no doubt, have been found. She had a clear and noble spirit; but
she had some of her sex's errors. Her mind sunk under the uniform
terrors with which she was assailed, and her health became visibly
impaired.

Her firmness being thus far undermined, Grimes, in pursuance of his
instructions, took care, in his next interview, to throw out an
insinuation that, for his own part, he had never cared for the match,
and since she was so averse to it, would be better pleased that it
should never take place. Between one and the other however, he was got
into a scrape, and now he supposed he must marry, will he, nill he. The
two squires would infallibly ruin him upon the least appearance of
backwardness on his part, as they were accustomed to do every inferior
that resisted their will. Emily was rejoiced to find her admirer in so
favourable a disposition; and earnestly pressed him to give effect to
this humane declaration. Her representations were full of eloquence and
energy. Grimes appeared to be moved at the fervency of her manner; but
objected the resentment of Mr. Tyrrel and his landlord. At length,
however, he suggested a project, in consequence of which he might assist
her in her escape, without its ever coming to their knowledge, as,
indeed, there was no likelihood that their suspicions would fix upon
him. "To be sure," said he, "you have refused me in a disdainful sort of
a way, as a man may say. Mayhap you thought I was no better 'an a brute:
but I bear you no malice, and I will show you that I am more
kind-hearted 'an you have been willing to think. It is a strange sort of
a vagary you have taken, to stand in your own light, and disoblige all
your friends. But if you are resolute, do you see? I scorn to be the
husband of a lass that is not every bit as willing as I; and so I will
even help to put you in a condition to follow your own inclinations."

Emily listened to these suggestions at first with eagerness and
approbation. But her fervency somewhat abated, when they came to discuss
the minute parts of the undertaking. It was necessary, as Grimes
informed her, that her escape should be effected in the dead of the
night. He would conceal himself for that purpose in the garden, and be
provided with false keys, by which to deliver her from her prison. These
circumstances were by no means adapted to calm her perturbed
imagination. To throw herself into the arms of the man whose intercourse
she was employing every method to avoid, and whom, under the idea of a
partner for life, she could least of all men endure, was, no doubt, an
extraordinary proceeding. The attendant circumstances of darkness and
solitude aggravated the picture. The situation of Tyrrel Place was
uncommonly lonely; it was three miles from the nearest village, and not
less than seven from that in which Mrs. Jakeman's sister resided, under
whose protection Miss Melville was desirous of placing herself. The
ingenuous character of Emily did not allow her once to suspect Grimes of
intending to make an ungenerous and brutal advantage of these
circumstances; but her mind involuntarily revolted against the idea of
committing herself, alone, to the disposal of a man, whom she had lately
been accustomed to consider as the instrument of her treacherous
relation.

After having for some time revolved these considerations, she thought of
the expedient of desiring Grimes to engage Mrs. Jakeman's sister to wait
for her at the outside of the garden. But this Grimes peremptorily
refused. He even flew into a passion at the proposal. It showed very
little gratitude, to desire him to disclose to other people his concern
in this dangerous affair. For his part, he was determined, in
consideration of his own safety, never to appear in it to any living
soul. If Miss did not believe him, when he made this proposal out of
pure good-nature, and would not trust him a single inch, she might even
see to the consequences herself. He was resolved to condescend no
further to the whims of a person who, in her treatment of him, had
shown herself as proud as Lucifer himself.

Emily exerted herself to appease his resentment; but all the eloquence
of her new confederate could not prevail upon her instantly to give up
her objection. She desired till the next day to consider of it. The day
after was fixed by Mr. Tyrrel for the marriage ceremony. In the mean
time she was pestered with intimations, in a thousand forms, of the fate
that so nearly awaited her. The preparations were so continued,
methodical, and regular, as to produce in her the most painful and
aching anxiety. If her heart attained a moment's intermission upon the
subject, her female attendant was sure, by some sly hint or sarcastical
remark, to put a speedy termination to her tranquillity. She felt
herself, as she afterwards remarked, alone, uninstructed, just broken
loose, as it were, from the trammels of infancy, without one single
creature to concern himself in her fate. She, who till then never knew
an enemy, had now, for three weeks, not seen the glimpse of a human
countenance, that she had not good reason to consider as wholly
estranged to her at least, if not unrelentingly bent on her destruction.
She now, for the first time, experienced the anguish of never having
known her parents, and being cast upon the charity of people with whom
she had too little equality, to hope to receive from them the offices of
friendship.

The succeeding night was filled with the most anxious thoughts. When a
momentary oblivion stole upon her senses, her distempered imagination
conjured up a thousand images of violence and falsehood; she saw herself
in the hands of her determined enemies, who did not hesitate by the most
daring treachery to complete her ruin. Her waking thoughts were not more
consoling. The struggle was too great for her constitution. As morning
approached, she resolved, at all hazards, to put herself into the hands
of Grimes. This determination was no sooner made, than she felt her
heart sensibly lightened. She could not conceive any evil which could
result from this proceeding, that deserved to be put in the balance
against those which, under the roof of her kinsman, appeared
unavoidable.

When she communicated her determination to Grimes, it was not possible
to say whether he received pleasure or pain from the intimation. He
smiled indeed; but his smile was accompanied by a certain abrupt
ruggedness of countenance, so that it might equally well be the smile of
sarcasm or of congratulation. He, however, renewed his assurances of
fidelity to his engagements and punctuality of execution. Meanwhile the
day was interspersed with nuptial presents and preparations, all
indicating the firmness as well as security of the directors of the
scene. Emily had hoped that, as the crisis approached, they might have
remitted something of their usual diligence. She was resolved, in that
case, if a fair opportunity had offered, to give the slip both to her
jailors, and to her new and reluctantly chosen confederate. But, though
extremely vigilant for that purpose, she found the execution of the idea
impracticable.

At length the night, so critical to her happiness, approached. The mind
of Emily could not fail, on this occasion, to be extremely agitated. She
had first exerted all her perspicacity to elude the vigilance of her
attendant. This insolent and unfeeling tyrant, instead of any
relentings, had only sought to make sport of her anxiety. Accordingly,
in one instance she hid herself, and, suffering Emily to suppose that
the coast was clear, met her at the end of the gallery, near the top of
the staircase. "How do you do, my dear?" said she, with an insulting
tone. "And so the little dear thought itself cunning enough to outwit
me, did it? Oh, it was a sly little gipsy! Go, go back, love; troop!"
Emily felt deeply the trick that was played upon her. She sighed, but
disdained to return any answer to this low vulgarity. Being once more in
her chamber, she sat down in a chair, and remained buried in reverie for
more than two hours. After this she went to her drawers, and turned
over, in a hurrying confused way, her linen and clothes, having in her
mind the provision it would be necessary to make for her elopement. Her
jailor officiously followed her from place to place, and observed what
she did for the present in silence. It was now the hour of rest. "Good
night, child," said this saucy girl, in the act of retiring. "It is time
to lock up. For the few next hours, the time is your own. Make the best
use of it! Do'ee think ee can creep out at the key-hole, lovey? At eight
o'clock you see me again. And then, and then," added she, clapping her
hands, "it is all over. The sun is not surer to rise, than you and your
honest man to be made one."

There was something in the tone with which this slut uttered her
farewell, that suggested the question to Emily, "What does she mean? Is
it possible that she should know what has been planned for the few next
hours?"--This was the first moment that suspicion had offered itself,
and its continuance was short. With an aching heart she folded up the
few necessaries she intended to take with her. She instinctively
listened, with an anxiety that would almost have enabled her to hear the
stirring of a leaf. From time to time she thought her ear was struck
with the sound of feet; but the treading, if treading it were, was so
soft, that she could never ascertain whether it were a real sound, or
the mere creature of the fancy. Then all was still, as if the universal
motion had been at rest. By and by she conceived she overheard a noise
as of buzzing and low-muttered speech. Her heart palpitated; for a
second time she began to doubt the honesty of Grimes. The suggestion was
now more anxious than before; but it was too late. Presently she heard
the sound of a key in her chamber-door, and the rustic made his
appearance. She started, and cried, "Are we discovered? did not I hear
you speak?" Grimes advanced on tiptoe with his finger to his lip. "No,
no," replied he, "all is safe!" He took her by the hand, led her in
silence out of the house, and then across the garden. Emily examined
with her eye the doors and passages as they proceeded, and looked on all
sides with fearful suspicion; but every thing was as vacant and still as
she herself could have wished. Grimes opened a back-door of the garden
already unlocked, that led into an unfrequented lane. There stood two
horses ready equipped for the journey, and fastened by their bridles to
a post not six yards distant from the garden. Grimes pushed the door
after them.

"By Gemini," said he, "my heart was in my mouth. As I comed along to
you, I saw Mun, coachey, pop along from the back-door to the stables. He
was within a hop, step, and jump of me. But he had a lanthorn in his
hand, and he did not see me, being as I was darkling." Saying this, he
assisted Miss Melville to mount. He troubled her little during the
route; on the contrary, he was remarkably silent and contemplative, a
circumstance by no means disagreeable to Emily, to whom his conversation
had never been acceptable.

After having proceeded about two miles, they turned into a wood, through
which the road led to the place of their destination. The night was
extremely dark, at the same time that the air was soft and mild, it
being now the middle of summer. Under pretence of exploring the way,
Grimes contrived, when they had already penetrated into the midst of
this gloomy solitude, to get his horse abreast with that of Miss
Melville, and then, suddenly reaching out his hand, seized hold of her
bridle. "I think we may as well stop here a bit," said he.

"Stop!" exclaimed Emily with surprise; "why should we stop? Mr. Grimes,
what do you mean?"

"Come, come," said he, "never trouble yourself to wonder. Did you think
I were such a goose, to take all this trouble merely to gratify your
whim? I' faith, nobody shall find me a pack-horse, to go of other folks'
errands, without knowing a reason why. I cannot say that I much minded
to have you at first; but your ways are enough to stir the blood of my
grand-dad. Far-fetched and dear-bought is always relishing. Your consent
was so hard to gain, that squire thought it was surest asking in the
dark. A' said however, a' would have no such doings in his house, and
so, do ye see, we are comed here."

"For God's sake, Mr. Grimes, think what you are about! You cannot be
base enough to ruin a poor creature who has put herself under your
protection!

"Ruin! No, no, I will make an honest woman of you, when all is done.
Nay, none of your airs; no tricks upon travellers! I have you here as
safe AS a horse in a pound; there is not a house nor a shed within a
mile of us; and, if I miss the opportunity, call me spade. Faith, you
are a delicate morsel, and there is no time to be lost!"

Miss Melville had but an instant in which to collect her thoughts. She
felt that there was little hope of softening the obstinate and
insensible brute in whose power she was placed. But the presence of mind
and intrepidity annexed to her character did not now desert her. Grimes
had scarcely finished his harangue, when, with a strong and unexpected
jerk, she disengaged the bridle from his grasp, and at the same time put
her horse upon full speed. She had scarcely advanced twice the length of
her horse, when Grimes recovered from his surprise, and pursued her,
inexpressibly mortified at being so easily overreached. The sound of his
horse behind served but to rouse more completely the mettle of that of
Emily; whether by accident or sagacity, the animal pursued without a
fault the narrow and winding way; and the chase continued the whole
length of the wood.

At the extremity of this wood there was a gate. The recollection of this
softened a little the cutting disappointment of Grimes, as he thought
himself secure of putting an end, by its assistance, to the career of
Emily; nor was it very probable that any body would appear to interrupt
his designs, in such a place, and in the dead and silence of the night.
By the most extraordinary accident, however, they found a man on
horseback in wait at this gate. "Help, help!" exclaimed the affrighted
Emily; "thieves! murder! help!" The man was Mr. Falkland. Grimes knew
his voice; and therefore, though he attempted a sort of sullen
resistance, it was feebly made. Two other men, whom, by reason of the
darkness, he had not at first seen, and who were Mr. Falkland's
servants, hearing the bustle of the rencounter, and alarmed for the
safety of their master, rode up; and then Grimes, disappointed at the
loss of his gratification, and admonished by conscious guilt, shrunk
from farther parley, and rode off in silence.

It may seem strange that Mr. Falkland should thus a second time have
been the saviour of Miss Melville, and that under circumstances the most
unexpected and singular. But in this instance it is easily to be
accounted for. He had heard of a man who lurked about this wood for
robbery or some other bad design, and that it was conjectured this man
was Hawkins, another of the victims of Mr. Tyrrel's rural tyranny, whom
I shall immediately have occasion to introduce. Mr. Falkland's
compassion had already been strongly excited in favour of Hawkins; he
had in vain endeavoured to find him, and do him good; and he easily
conceived that, if the conjecture which had been made in this instance
proved true, he might have it in his power not only to do what he had
always intended, but further, to save from a perilous offence against
the laws and society a man who appeared to have strongly imbibed the
principles of justice and virtue. He took with him two servants,
because, going with the express design of encountering robbers, if
robbers should be found, he believed he should be inexcusable if he did
not go provided against possible accidents. But he had directed them, at
the same time that they kept within call, to be out of the reach of
being seen; and it was only the eagerness of their zeal that had brought
them up thus early in the present encounter.

This new adventure promised something extraordinary. Mr. Falkland did
not immediately recognise Miss Melville; and the person of Grimes was
that of a total stranger, whom he did not recollect to have ever seen.
But it was easy to understand the merits of the case, and the propriety
of interfering. The resolute manner of Mr. Falkland, conjoined with the
dread which Grimes, oppressed with a sense of wrong, entertained of the
opposition of so elevated a personage, speedily put the ravisher to
flight. Emily was left alone with her deliverer. He found her much more
collected and calm, than could reasonably have been expected from a
person who had been, a moment before, in the most alarming situation.
She told him of the place to which she desired to be conveyed, and he
immediately undertook to escort her. As they went along, she recovered
that state of mind which inclined her to make a person to whom she had
such repeated obligations, and who was so eminently the object of her
admiration, acquainted with the events that had recently befallen her.
Mr. Falkland listened with eagerness and surprise. Though he had already
known various instances of Mr. Tyrrel's mean jealousy and unfeeling
tyranny, this surpassed them all; and he could scarcely credit his ears
while he heard the tale. His brutal neighbour seemed to realise all that
has been told of the passions of fiends. Miss Melville was obliged to
repeat, in the course of her tale, her kinsman's rude accusation against
her, of entertaining a passion for Mr. Falkland; and this she did with
the most bewitching simplicity and charming confusion. Though this part
of the tale was a source of real pain to her deliverer, yet it is not to
be supposed but that the flattering partiality of this unhappy girl
increased the interest he felt in her welfare, and the indignation he
conceived against her infernal kinsman.

They arrived without accident at the house of the good lady under whose
protection Emily desired to place herself. Here Mr. Falkland willingly
left her as in a place of security. Such conspiracies as that of which
she was intended to have been the victim, depend for their success upon
the person against whom they are formed being out of the reach of help;
and the moment they are detected, they are annihilated. Such reasoning
will, no doubt, be generally found sufficiently solid; and it appeared
to Mr. Falkland perfectly applicable to the present case. But he was
mistaken.




CHAPTER IX.


Mr. Falkland had experienced the nullity of all expostulation with Mr.
Tyrrel, and was therefore content in the present case with confining his
attention to the intended victim. The indignation with which he thought
of his neighbour's character was now grown to such a height, as to fill
him with reluctance to the idea of a voluntary interview. There was
indeed another affair which had been contemporary with this, that had
once more brought these mortal enemies into a state of contest, and had
contributed to raise into a temper little short of madness, the already
inflamed and corrosive bitterness of Mr. Tyrrel.

There was a tenant of Mr. Tyrrel, one Hawkins;--I cannot mention his
name without recollecting the painful tragedies that are annexed to it!
This Hawkins had originally been taken up by Mr. Tyrrel, with a view of
protecting him from the arbitrary proceedings of a neighbouring squire,
though he had now in his turn become an object of persecution to Mr.
Tyrrel himself. The first ground of their connection was this:--Hawkins,
beside a farm which he rented under the above-mentioned squire, had a
small freehold estate that he inherited from his father. This of course
entitled him to a vote in the county elections; and, a warmly contested
election having occurred, he was required by his landlord to vote for
the candidate in whose favour he had himself engaged. Hawkins refused
to obey the mandate, and soon after received notice to quit the farm he
at that time rented.

It happened that Mr. Tyrrel had interested himself strongly in behalf of
the opposite candidate; and, as Mr. Tyrrel's estate bordered upon the
seat of Hawkins's present residence, the ejected countryman could think
of no better expedient than that of riding over to this gentleman's
mansion, and relating the case to him. Mr. Tyrrel heard him through with
attention. "Well, friend," said he, "it is very true that I wished Mr.
Jackman to carry his election; but you know it is usual in these cases
for tenants to vote just as their landlords please. I do not think
proper to encourage rebellion."--"All that is very right, and please
you," replied Hawkins, "and I would have voted at my landlord's bidding
for any other man in the kingdom but Squire Marlow. You must know one
day his huntsman rode over my fence, and so through my best field of
standing corn. It was not above a dozen yards about if he had kept the
cart-road. The fellow had served me the same sauce, an it please your
honour, three or four times before. So I only asked him what he did that
for, and whether he had not more conscience than to spoil people's crops
o' that fashion? Presently the squire came up. He is but a poor,
weazen-face chicken of a gentleman, saving your honour's reverence. And
so he flew into a woundy passion, and threatened to horsewhip me. I will
do as much in reason to pleasure my landlord as arr a tenant he has; but
I will not give my vote to a man that threatens to horsewhip me. And so,
your honour, I and my wife and three children are to be turned out of
house and home, and what I am to do to maintain them God knows. I have
been a hard-working man, and have always lived well, and I do think the
case is main hard. Squire Underwood turns me out of my farm; and if your
honour do not take me in, I know none of the neighbouring gentry will,
for fear, as they say, of encouraging their own tenants to run rusty
too."

This representation was not without its effect upon Mr. Tyrrel. "Well,
well, man," replied he, "we will see what can be done. Order and
subordination are very good things; but people should know how much to
require. As you tell the story, I cannot see that you are greatly to
blame. Marlow is a coxcombical prig, that is the truth on't; and if a
man will expose himself, why, he must even take what follows. I do hate
a Frenchified fop with all my soul: and I cannot say that I am much
pleased with my neighbour Underwood for taking the part of such a
rascal. Hawkins, I think, is your name? You may call on Barnes, my
steward, to-morrow, and he shall speak to you."

While Mr. Tyrrel was speaking, he recollected that he had a farm vacant,
of nearly the same value as that which Hawkins at present rented under
Mr. Underwood. He immediately consulted his steward, and, finding the
thing suitable in every respect, Hawkins was installed out of hand in
the catalogue of Mr. Tyrrel's tenants. Mr. Underwood extremely resented
this proceeding, which indeed, as being contrary to the understood
conventions of the country gentlemen, few people but Mr. Tyrrel would
have ventured upon. There was an end, said Mr. Underwood, to all
regulation, if tenants were to be encouraged in such disobedience. It
was not a question of this or that candidate, seeing that any gentleman,
who was a true friend to his country, would rather lose his election
than do a thing which, if once established into a practice, would
deprive them for ever of the power of managing any election. The
labouring people were sturdy and resolute enough of their own accord; it
became every day more difficult to keep them under any subordination;
and, if the gentlemen were so ill advised as to neglect the public good,
and encourage them in their insolence, there was no foreseeing where it
would end.

Mr. Tyrrel was not of a stamp to be influenced by these remonstrances.
Their general spirit was sufficiently conformable to the sentiments he
himself entertained; but he was of too vehement a temper to maintain the
character of a consistent politician; and, however wrong his conduct
might be, he would by no means admit of its being set right by the
suggestions of others. The more his patronage of Hawkins was criticised,
the more inflexibly he adhered to it; and he was at no loss in clubs and
other assemblies to overbear and silence, if not to confute, his
censurers. Beside which, Hawkins had certain accomplishments which
qualified him to be a favourite with Mr. Tyrrel. The bluntness of his
manner and the ruggedness of his temper gave him some resemblance to his
landord; and, as these qualities were likely to be more frequently
exercised on such persons as had incurred Mr. Tyrrel's displeasure, than
upon Mr. Tyrrel himself, they were not observed without some degree of
complacency. In a word, he every day received new marks of distinction
from his patron, and after some time was appointed coadjutor to Mr.
Barnes under the denomination of bailiff. It was about the same period
that he obtained a lease of the farm of which he was tenant.

Mr. Tyrrel determined, as occasion offered, to promote every part of the
family of this favoured dependent. Hawkins had a son, a lad of
seventeen, of an agreeable person, a ruddy complexion, and of quick and
lively parts. This lad was in an uncommon degree the favourite of his
father, who seemed to have nothing so much at heart as the future
welfare of his son. Mr. Tyrrel had noticed him two or three times with
approbation; and the boy, being fond of the sports of the field, had
occasionally followed the hounds, and displayed various instances, both
of agility and sagacity, in presence of the squire. One day in
particular he exhibited himself with uncommon advantage; and Mr. Tyrrel
without further delay proposed to his father, to take him into his
family, and make him whipper-in to his hounds, till he could provide him
with some more lucrative appointment in his service.

This proposal was received by Hawkins with various marks of
mortification. He excused himself with hesitation for not accepting the
offered favour; said the lad was in many ways useful to him; and hoped
his honour would not insist upon depriving him of his assistance. This
apology might perhaps have been sufficient with any other man than Mr.
Tyrrel; but it was frequently observed of this gentleman that, when he
had once formed a determination, however slight, in favour of any
measure, he was never afterwards known to give it up, and that the only
effect of opposition was to make him eager and inflexible, in pursuit of
that to which he had before been nearly indifferent. At first he seemed
to receive the apology of Hawkins with good humour, and to see nothing
in it but what was reasonable; but afterwards, every time he saw the
boy, his desire of retaining him in his service was increased, and he
more than once repeated to his father the good disposition in which he
felt himself towards him. At length he observed that the lad was no more
to be seen mingling in his favourite sports, and he began to suspect
that this originated in a determination to thwart him in his projects.

Roused by this suspicion, which, to a man of Mr. Tyrrel's character,
was not of a nature to brook delay, he sent for Hawkins to confer with
him. "Hawkins," said he, in a tone of displeasure, "I am not satisfied
with you. I have spoken to you two or three times about this lad of
yours, whom I am desirous of taking into favour. What is the reason,
sir, that you seem unthankful and averse to my kindness? You ought to
know that I am not to be trifled with. I shall not be contented, when I
offer my favours, to have them rejected by such fellows as you. I made
you what you are; and, if I please, can make you more helpless and
miserable than you were when I found you. Have a care!"

"An it please your honour," said Hawkins, "you have been a very good
master to me, and I will tell you the whole truth. I hope you will na be
angry. This lad is my favourite, my comfort, and the stay of my age."

"Well, and what then? Is that a reason you should hinder his
preferment?"

"Nay, pray your honour, hear me. I may be very weak for aught I know in
this case, but I cannot help it. My father was a clergyman. We have all
of us lived in a creditable way; and I cannot bear to think that this
poor lad of mine should go to service. For my part, I do not see any
good that comes by servants. I do not know, your honour, but, I think, I
should not like my Leonard to be such as they. God forgive me, if I
wrong them! But this is a very dear case, and I cannot bear to risk my
poor boy's welfare, when I can so easily, if you please, keep him out or
harm's way. At present he is sober and industrious, and, without being
pert or surly, knows what is due to him. I know, your honour, that it is
main foolish of me to talk to you thus; but your honour has been a good
master to me, and I cannot bear to tell you a lie."

Mr. Tyrrel had heard the whole of this harangue in silence, because he
was too much astonished to open his mouth. If a thunderbolt had fallen
at his feet, he could not have testified greater surprise. He had
thought that Hawkins was so foolishly fond of his son, that he could not
bear to trust him out of his presence; but had never in the slightest
degree suspected what he now found to be the truth.

"Oh, ho, you are a gentleman, are you? A pretty gentleman truly! your
father was a clergyman! Your family is too good to enter into my
service! Why you impudent rascal! was it for this that I took you up,
when Mr. Underwood dismissed you for your insolence to him? Have I been
nursing a viper in my bosom? Pretty master's manners will be
contaminated truly? He will not know what is due to him, but will be
accustomed to obey orders! You insufferable villain! Get out of my
sight! Depend upon it, I will have no gentlemen on my estate! I will off
with them, root and branch, bag and baggage! So do you hear, sir? come
to me to-morrow morning, bring your son, and ask my pardon; or, take my
word for it, I will make you so miserable, you shall wish you had never
been born."

This treatment was too much for Hawkins's patience. "There is no need,
your honour, that I should come to you again about this affair. I have
taken up my determination, and no time can make any change in it. I am
main sorry to displease your worship, and I know that you can do me a
great deal of mischief. But I hope you will not be so hardhearted as to
ruin a father only for being fond of his child, even if so be that his
fondness should make him do a foolish thing. But I cannot help it, your
honour: you must do as you please. The poorest neger, as a man may say,
has some point that he will not part with. I will lose all that I have,
and go to day-labour, and my son too, if needs must; but I will not make
a gentleman's servant of him."

"Very well, friend; very well!" replied Mr. Tyrrel, foaming with rage.
"Depend upon it, I will remember you! Your pride shall have a downfal!
God damn it! is it come to this? Shall a rascal that farms his forty
acres, pretend to beard the lord of the manor? I will tread you into
paste! Let me advise you, scoundrel, to shut up your house and fly, as
if the devil was behind you! You may think yourself happy, if I be not
too quick for you yet, if you escape in a whole skin! I would not suffer
such a villain to remain upon my land a day longer, if I could gain the
Indies by it!"

"Not so fast, your honour," answered Hawkins, sturdily. "I hope you will
think better of it, and see that I have not been to blame. But if you
should not, there is some harm that you can do me, and some harm that
you cannot. Though I am a plain, working man, your honour, do you see?
yet I am a man still. No; I have got a lease of my farm, and I shall not
quit it o' thaten. I hope there is some law for poor folk, as well as for
rich."

Mr. Tyrrel, unused to contradiction, was provoked beyond bearing at the
courage and independent spirit of his retainer. There was not a tenant
upon his estate, or at least not one of Hawkins's mediocrity of fortune,
whom the general policy of landowners, and still more the arbitrary and
uncontrollable temper of Mr. Tyrrel, did not effectually restrain from
acts of open defiance.

"Excellent, upon my soul! God damn my blood! but you are a rare fellow.
You have a lease, have you? You will not quit, not you! a pretty pass
things are come to, if a lease can protect such fellows as you against
the lord of a manor! But you are for a trial of skill? Oh, very well,
friend, very well! With all my soul! Since it is come to that, we will
show you some pretty sport before we have done! But get out of my sight,
you rascal! I have not another word to say to you! Never darken my doors
again."

Hawkins (to borrow the language of the world) was guilty in this affair
of a double imprudence. He talked to his landlord in a more peremptory
manner than the constitution and practices of this country allow a
dependent to assume. But above all, having been thus hurried away by his
resentment, he ought to have foreseen the consequences. It was mere
madness in him to think of contesting with a man of Mr. Tyrrel's
eminence and fortune. It was a fawn contending with a lion. Nothing
could have been more easy to predict, than that it was of no avail for
him to have right on his side, when his adversary had influence and
wealth, and therefore could so victoriously justify any extravagancies
that he might think proper to commit. This maxim was completely
illustrated in the sequel. Wealth and despotism easily know how to
engage those laws as the coadjutors of their oppression, which were
perhaps at first intended [witless and miserable precaution!] for the
safeguards of the poor.

From this moment Mr. Tyrrel was bent upon Hawkins's destruction; and he
left no means unemployed that could either harass or injure the object
of his persecution. He deprived him of his appointment of bailiff, and
directed Barnes and his other dependents to do him ill offices upon all
occasions. Mr. Tyrrel, by the tenure of his manor, was impropriator of
the great tithes, and this circumstance afforded him frequent
opportunities of petty altercation. The land of one part of Hawkins's
farm, though covered with corn, was lower than the rest; and
consequently exposed to occasional inundations from a river by which it
was bounded. Mr. Tyrrel had a dam belonging to this river privately cut,
about a fortnight before the season of harvest, and laid the whole under
water. He ordered his servants to pull away the fences of the higher
ground during the night, and to turn in his cattle, to the utter
destruction of the crop. These expedients, however, applied to only one
part of the property of this unfortunate man. But Mr. Tyrrel did not
stop here. A sudden mortality took place among Hawkins's live stock,
attended with very suspicious circumstances. Hawkins's vigilance was
strongly excited by this event, and he at length succeeded in tracing
the matter so accurately, that he conceived he could bring it home to
Mr. Tyrrel himself.

Hawkins had hitherto carefully avoided, notwithstanding the injuries he
had suffered, the attempting to right himself by legal process; being of
opinion that law was better adapted for a weapon of tyranny in the hands
of the rich, than for a shield to protect the humbler part of the
community against their usurpations. In this last instance however he
conceived that the offence was so atrocious, as to make it impossible
that any rank could protect the culprit against the severity of justice.
In the sequel, he saw reason to applaud himself for his former
inactivity in this respect, and to repent that any motive had been
strong enough to persuade him into a contrary system.

This was the very point to which Mr. Tyrrel wanted to bring him, and he
could scarcely credit his good fortune, when he was told that Hawkins
had entered an action. His congratulation upon this occasion was
immoderate, as he now conceived that the ruin of his late favourite was
irretrievable. He consulted his attorney, and urged him by every motive
he could devise, to employ the whole series of his subterfuges in the
present affair. The direct repelling of the charge exhibited against him
was the least part of his care; the business was, by affidavits,
motions, pleas, demurrers, flaws, and appeals, to protract the question
from term to term, and from court to court. It would, as Mr. Tyrrel
argued, be the disgrace of a civilized country, if a gentleman, when
insolently attacked in law by the scum of the earth, could not convert
the cause into a question of the longest purse, and stick in the skirts
of his adversary till he had reduced him to beggary.

Mr. Tyrrel, however, was by no means so far engrossed by his law-suit,
as to neglect other methods of proceeding offensively against his
tenant. Among the various expedients that suggested themselves, there
was one, which, though it tended rather to torment than irreparably
injure the sufferer, was not rejected. This was derived from the
particular situation of Hawkins's house, barns, stacks, and outhouses.
They were placed at the extremity of a slip of land connecting them with
the rest of the farm, and were surrounded on three sides by fields, in
the occupation of one of Mr. Tyrrel's tenants most devoted to the
pleasures of his landlord. The road to the market-town ran at the bottom
of the largest of these fields, and was directly in view of the front of
the house. No inconvenience had yet arisen from that circumstance, as
there had always been a broad path, that intersected this field, and led
directly from Hawkins's house to the road. This path, or private road,
was now, by concert of Mr. Tyrrel and his obliging tenant, shut up, so
as to make Hawkins a sort of prisoner in his own domains, and oblige him
to go near a mile about for the purposes of his traffic.

Young Hawkins, the lad who had been the original subject of dispute
between his father and the squire, had much of his father's spirit, and
felt an uncontrollable indignation against the successive acts of
despotism of which he was a witness. His resentment was the greater,
because the sufferings to which his parent was exposed, all of them
flowed from affection to him, at the same time that he could not propose
removing the ground of dispute, as by so doing he would seem to fly in
the face of his father's paternal kindness. Upon the present occasion,
without asking any counsel but of his own impatient resentment, he went
in the middle of the night, and removed all the obstructions that had
been placed in the way of the old path, broke the padlocks that had been
fixed, and threw open the gates.

In these operations he did not proceed unobserved, and the next day a
warrant was issued for apprehending him. He was accordingly carried
before a meeting of justices, and by them committed to the county gaol,
to take his trial for the felony at the next assizes. Mr. Tyrrel was
determined to prosecute the offence with the greatest severity; and his
attorney, having made the proper enquiries for that purpose, undertook
to bring it under that clause of the act 9 Geo. I. commonly called the
Black Act, which declares that "any person, armed with a sword, or other
offensive weapon, and having his face blackened, or being otherwise
disguised, appearing in any warren or place where hares or conies have
been or shall be usually kept, and being thereof duly convicted, shall
be adjudged guilty of felony, and shall suffer death, as in cases of
felony, without benefit of clergy." Young Hawkins, it seemed, had
buttoned the cape of his great coat over his face, as soon as he
perceived himself to be observed, and he was furnished with a
wrenching-iron for the purpose of breaking the padlocks. The attorney
further undertook to prove, by sufficient witnesses, that the field in
question was a warren in which hares were regularly fed. Mr. Tyrrel
seized upon these pretences with inexpressible satisfaction. He
prevailed upon the justices, by the picture he drew of the obstinacy and
insolence of the Hawkinses, fully to commit the lad upon this miserable
charge; and it was by no means so certain as paternal affection would
have desired, that the same overpowering influence would not cause in
the sequel the penal clause to be executed in all its strictness.

This was the finishing stroke to Hawkins's miseries: as he was not
deficient in courage, he had stood up against his other persecutions
without flinching. He was not unaware of the advantages which our laws
and customs give to the rich over the poor, in contentions of this kind.
But, being once involved, there was a stubbornness in his nature that
would not allow him to retract, and he suffered himself to hope, rather
than expect, a favourable issue. But in this last event he was wounded
in the point that was nearest his heart. He had feared to have his son
contaminated and debased by a servile station, and he now saw him
transferred to the seminary of a gaol. He was even uncertain as to the
issue of his imprisonment, and trembled to think what the tyranny of
wealth might effect to blast his hopes for ever.

From this moment his heart died within him. He had trusted to
persevering industry and skill, to save the wreck of his little property
from the vulgar spite of his landlord. But he had now no longer any
spirit to exert those efforts which his situation more than ever
required. Mr. Tyrrel proceeded without remission in his machinations;
Hawkins's affairs every day grew more desperate, and the squire,
watching the occasion, took the earliest opportunity of seizing upon
his remaining property in the mode of a distress for rent.

It was precisely in this stage of the affair, that Mr. Falkland and Mr.
Tyrrel accidentally met, in a private road near the habitation of the
latter. They were on horseback, and Mr. Falkland was going to the house
of the unfortunate tenant, who seemed upon the point of perishing under
his landlord's malice. He had been just made acquainted with the tale of
this persecution. It had indeed been an additional aggravation of
Hawkins's calamity, that Mr. Falkland, whose interference might
otherwise have saved him, had been absent from the neighbourhood for a
considerable time. He had been three months in London, and from thence
had gone to visit his estates in another part of the island. The proud
and self-confident spirit of this poor fellow always disposed him to
depend, as long as possible, upon his own exertions. He had avoided
applying to Mr. Falkland, or indeed indulging himself in any manner in
communicating and bewailing his hard hap, in the beginning of the
contention, and, when the extremity grew more urgent, and he would have
been willing to recede in some degree from the stubbornness of his
measures, he found it no longer in his power. After an absence of
considerable duration, Mr. Falkland at length returned somewhat
unexpectedly; and having learned, among the first articles of country
intelligence, the distresses of this unfortunate yeoman, he resolved to
ride over to his house the next morning, and surprise him with all the
relief it was in his power to bestow.

At sight of Mr. Tyrrel in this unexpected rencounter, his face reddened
with indignation. His first feeling, as he afterwards said, was to avoid
him; but finding that he must pass him, he conceived that it would be
want of spirit not to acquaint him with his feelings on the present
occasion.

"Mr. Tyrrel," said he, somewhat abruptly, "I am sorry for a piece of
news which I have just heard."

"And pray, sir, what is your sorrow to me?"

"A great deal, sir: it is caused by the distresses of a poor tenant of
yours, Hawkins. If your steward have proceeded without your authority, I
think it right to inform you what he has done; and, if he have had your
authority, I would gladly persuade you to think better of it."

"Mr. Falkland, it would be quite as well if you would mind your own
business, and leave me to mind mine. I want no monitor, and I will have
none."

"You mistake, Mr. Tyrrel; I am minding my own business. If I see you
fall into a pit, it is my business to draw you out and save your life.
If I see you pursuing a wrong mode of conduct, it is my business to set
you right and save your honour."

"Zounds, sir, do not think to put your conundrums upon me! Is not the
man my tenant? Is not my estate my own? What signifies calling it mine,
if I am not to have the direction of it? Sir, I pay for what I have: I
owe no man a penny; and I will not put my estate to nurse to you, nor
the best he that wears a head."

"It is very true," said Mr. Falkland, avoiding any direct notice of the
last words of Mr. Tyrrel, "that there is a distinction of ranks. I
believe that distinction is a good thing, and necessary to the peace of
mankind. But, however necessary it may be, we must acknowledge that it
puts some hardship upon the lower orders of society. It makes one's
heart ache to think, that one man is born to the inheritance of every
superfluity, while the whole share of another, without any demerit of
his, is drudgery and starving; and that all this is indispensable. We
that are rich, Mr. Tyrrel, must do every thing in our power to lighten
the yoke of these unfortunate people. We must not use the advantage that
accident has given us with an unmerciful hand. Poor wretches! they are
pressed almost beyond bearing as it is; and, if we unfeelingly give
another turn to the machine, they will be crushed into atoms."

This picture was not without its effect, even upon the obdurate mind of
Mr. Tyrrel.--"Well, sir, I am no tyrant. I know very well that tyranny
is a bad thing. But you do not infer from thence that these people are
to do as they please, and never meet with their deserts?"

"Mr. Tyrrel, I see that you are shaken in your animosity. Suffer me to
hail the new-born benevolence of your nature. Go with me to Hawkins. Do
not let us talk of his deserts! Poor fellow! he has suffered almost all
that human nature can endure. Let your forgiveness upon this occasion be
the earnest of good neighbourhood and friendship between you and me."

"No, sir, I will not go. I own there is something in what you say. I
always knew you had the wit to make good your own story, and tell a
plausible tale. But I will not be come over thus. It has been my
character, when I had once conceived a scheme of vengeance, never to
forego it; and I will not change that character. I took up Hawkins when
every body forsook him, and made a man of him; and the ungrateful rascal
has only insulted me for my pains. Curse me, if I ever forgive him! It
would be a good jest indeed, if I were to forgive the insolence of my
own creature at the desire of a man like you that has been my perpetual
plague."

"For God's sake, Mr. Tyrrel, have some reason in your resentment! Let us
suppose that Hawkins has behaved unjustifiably, and insulted you: is
that an offence that never can be expiated? Must the father be ruined,
and the son hanged, to glut your resentment?"

"Damn me, sir, but you may talk your heart out; you shall get nothing of
me. I shall never forgive myself for having listened to you for a
moment. I will suffer nobody to stop the stream of my resentment; if I
ever were to forgive him, it should be at nobody's, entreaty but my own.
But, sir, I never will. If he and all his family were at my feet, I
would order them all to be hanged the next minute, if my power were as
good as my will."

"And this is your decision, is it? Mr. Tyrrel, I am ashamed of you!
Almighty God! to hear you talk gives one a loathing for the institutions
and regulations of society, and would induce one to fly the very face of
man! But, no! society casts you out; man abominates you. No wealth, no
rank, can buy out your stain. You will live deserted in the midst of
your species; you will go into crowded societies, and no one will deign
so much as to salute you. They will fly from your glance as they would
from the gaze of a basilisk. Where do you expect to find the hearts of
flint that shall sympathise with yours? You have the stamp of misery,
incessant, undivided, unpitied misery!"

Thus saying, Mr. Falkland gave spurs to his horse, rudely pushed beside
Mr. Tyrrel, and was presently out of sight. Flaming indignation
annihilated even his favourite sense of honour, and he regarded his
neighbour as a wretch, with whom it was impossible even to enter into
contention. For the latter, he remained for the present motionless and
petrified. The glowing enthusiasm of Mr. Falkland was such as might well
have unnerved the stoutest foe. Mr. Tyrrel, in spite of himself, was
blasted with the compunctions of guilt, and unable to string himself
for the contest. The picture Mr. Falkland had drawn was prophetic. It
described what Mr. Tyrrel chiefly feared; and what in its commencements
he thought he already felt. It was responsive to the whispering of his
own meditations; it simply gave body and voice to the spectre that
haunted him, and to the terrors of which he was an hourly prey.

By and by, however, he recovered. The more he had been temporarily
confounded, the fiercer was his resentment when he came to himself. Such
hatred never existed in a human bosom without marking its progress with
violence and death. Mr. Tyrrel, however, felt no inclination to have
recourse to personal defiance. He was the furthest in the world from a
coward; but his genius sunk before the genius of Falkland. He left his
vengeance to the disposal of circumstances. He was secure that his
animosity would never be forgotten nor diminished by the interposition
of any time or events. Vengeance was his nightly dream, and the
uppermost of his waking thoughts.

Mr. Falkland had departed from this conference with a confirmed
disapprobation of the conduct of his neighbour, and an unalterable
resolution to do every thing in his power to relieve the distresses of
Hawkins. But he was too late. When he arrived, he found the house
already evacuated by its master. The family was removed nobody knew
whither; Hawkins had absconded, and, what was still more extraordinary,
the boy Hawkins had escaped on the very same day from the county gaol.
The enquiries Mr. Falkland set on foot after them were fruitless; no
traces could be found of the catastrophe of these unhappy people. That
catastrophe I shall shortly have occasion to relate, and it will be
found pregnant with horror, beyond what the blackest misanthropy could
readily have suggested.

I go on with my tale. I go on to relate those incidents in which my own
fate was so mysteriously involved. I lift the curtain, and bring forward
the last act of the tragedy.




CHAPTER X.


It may easily be supposed, that the ill temper cherished by Mr. Tyrrel
in his contention with Hawkins, and the increasing animosity between him
and Mr. Falkland, added to the impatience with which he thought of the
escape of Emily.

Mr. Tyrrel heard with astonishment of the miscarriage of an expedient,
of the success of which he had not previously entertained the slightest
suspicion. He became frantic with vexation. Grimes had not dared to
signify the event of his expedition in person, and the footman whom he
desired to announce to his master that Miss Melville was lost, the
moment after fled from his presence with the most dreadful
apprehensions. Presently he bellowed for Grimes, and the young man at
last appeared before him, more dead than alive. Grimes he compelled to
repeat the particulars of the tale; which he had no sooner done, than he
once again slunk away, shocked at the execrations with which Mr. Tyrrel
overwhelmed him. Grimes was no coward; but he reverenced the inborn
divinity that attends upon rank, as Indians worship the devil. Nor was
this all. The rage of Mr. Tyrrel was so ungovernable and fierce, that
few hearts could have been found so stout, as not to have trembled
before it with a sort of unconquerable inferiority.

He no sooner obtained a moment's pause than he began to recall to his
tempestuous mind the various circumstances of the case. His complaints
were bitter; and, in a tranquil observer, might have produced the united
feeling of pity for his sufferings, and horror at his depravity. He
recollected all the precautions he had used; he could scarcely find a
flaw in the process; and he cursed that blind and malicious power which
delighted to cross his most deep-laid schemes. "Of this malice he was
beyond all other human beings the object. He was mocked with the shadow
of power; and when he lifted his hand to smite, it was struck with
sudden palsy. [In the bitterness of his anguish, he forgot his recent
triumph over Hawkins, or perhaps he regarded it less as a triumph, than
an overthrow, because it had failed of coming up to the extent of his
malice.] To what purpose had Heaven given him a feeling of injury, and
an instinct to resent, while he could in no case make his resentment
felt! It was only necessary for him to be the enemy of any person, to
insure that person's being safe against the reach of misfortune. What
insults, the most shocking and repeated, had he received from this
paltry girl! And by whom was she now torn from his indignation? By that
devil that haunted him at every moment, that crossed him at every step,
that fixed at pleasure his arrows in his heart, and made mows and
mockery at his insufferable tortures."

There was one other reflection that increased his anguish, and made him
careless and desperate as to his future conduct. It was in vain to
conceal from himself that his reputation would be cruelly wounded by
this event. He had imagined that, while Emily was forced into this
odious marriage, she would be obliged by decorum, as soon as the event
was decided, to draw a veil over the compulsion she had suffered. But
this security was now lost, and Mr. Falkland would take a pride in
publishing his dishonour. Though the provocations he had received from
Miss Melville would, in his own opinion, have justified him in any
treatment he should have thought proper to inflict, he was sensible the
world would see the matter in a different light. This reflection
augmented the violence of his resolutions, and determined him to refuse
no means by which he could transfer the anguish that now preyed upon his
own mind to that of another.

Meanwhile, the composure and magnanimity of Emily had considerably
subsided, the moment she believed herself in a place of safety. While
danger and injustice assailed her with their menaces, she found in
herself a courage that disdained to yield. The succeeding appearance of
calm was more fatal to her. There was nothing now, powerfully to foster
her courage or excite her energy. She looked back at the trials she had
passed, and her soul sickened at the recollection of that, which, while
it was in act, she had had the fortitude to endure. Till the period at
which Mr. Tyrrel had been inspired with this cruel antipathy, she had
been in all instances a stranger to anxiety and fear. Uninured to
misfortune, she had suddenly and without preparation been made the
subject of the most infernal malignity. When a man of robust and
vigorous constitution has a fit of sickness, it produces a more powerful
effect, than the same indisposition upon a delicate valetudinarian. Such
was the case with Miss Melville. She passed the succeeding night
sleepless and uneasy, and was found in the morning with a high fever.
Her distemper resisted for the present all attempts to assuage it,
though there was reason to hope that the goodness of her constitution,
assisted by tranquillity and the kindness of those about her, would
ultimately surmount it. On the second day she was delirious. On the
night of that day she was arrested at the suit of Mr. Tyrrel, for a debt
contracted for board and necessaries for the last fourteen years.

The idea of this arrest, as the reader will perhaps recollect, first
occurred, in the conversation between Mr. Tyrrel and Miss Melville, soon
after he had thought proper to confine her to her chamber. But at that
time he had probably no serious conception of ever being induced to
carry it into execution. It had merely been mentioned by way of threat,
and as the suggestion of a mind, whose habits had long been accustomed
to contemplate every possible instrument of tyranny and revenge. But
now, that the unlooked-for rescue and escape of his poor kinswoman had
wrought up his thoughts to a degree of insanity, and that he revolved in
the gloomy recesses of his mind, how he might best shake off the load of
disappointment which oppressed him, the idea recurred with double force.
He was not long in forming his resolution; and, calling for Barnes his
steward, immediately gave him directions in what manner to proceed.

Barnes had been for several years the instrument of Mr. Tyrrel's
injustice. His mind was hardened by use, and he could, without remorse,
officiate as the spectator, or even as the author and director, of a
scene of vulgar distress. But even he was somewhat startled upon the
present occasion. The character and conduct of Emily in Mr. Tyrrel's
family had been without a blot. She had not a single enemy; and it was
impossible to contemplate her youth, her vivacity, and her guileless
innocence, without emotions of sympathy and compassion.

"Your worship?--I do not understand you!--Arrest Miss--Miss Emily!"

"Yes,--I tell you!--What is the matter with you?--Go instantly to
Swineard, the lawyer, and bid him finish the business out of hand!"

"Lord love your honour! Arrest her! Why she does not owe you a brass
farthing: she always lived upon your charity!"

"Ass! Scoundrel! I tell you she does owe me,--owes me eleven hundred
pounds.--The law justifies it.--What do you think laws were made for? I
do nothing but right, and right I will have."

"Your honour, I never questioned your orders in my life; but I must now.
I cannot see you ruin Miss Emily, poor girl! nay, and yourself too, for
the matter of that, and not say which way you are going. I hope you will
bear with me. Why, if she owed you ever so much, she cannot be arrested.
She is not of age."

"Will you have done?--Do not tell me of--It cannot, and It can. It has
been done before,--and it shall be done again. Let him dispute it that
dares! I will do it now and stand to it afterwards. Tell Swineard,--if
he make the least boggling, it is as much as his life is worth;--he
shall starve by inches."

"Pray, your honour, think better of it. Upon my life, the whole country
will cry shame of it."

"Barnes!--What do you mean? I am not used to be talked to, and I cannot
hear it! You have been a good fellow to me upon many occasions--But, if
I find you out for making one with them that dispute my authority, damn
my soul, if I do not make you sick of your life!"

"I have done, your honour. I will not say another word except this,--I
have heard as how that Miss Emily is sick a-bed. You are determined, you
say, to put her in jail. You do not mean to kill her, I take it."

"Let her die! I will not spare her for an hour--I will not always be
insulted. She had no consideration for me, and I have no mercy for
her.--I am in for it! They have provoked me past bearing,--and they
shall feel me! Tell Swineard, in bed or up, day or night, I will not
hear of an instant's delay."

Such were the directions of Mr. Tyrrel, and in strict conformity to his
directions were the proceedings of that respectable limb of the law he
employed upon the present occasion. Miss Melville had been delirious,
through a considerable part of the day on the evening of which the
bailiff and his follower arrived. By the direction of the physician whom
Mr. Falkland had ordered to attend her, a composing draught was
administered; and, exhausted as she was by the wild and distracted
images that for several hours had haunted her fancy, she was now sunk
into a refreshing slumber. Mrs. Hammond, the sister of Mrs. Jakeman, was
sitting by her bed-side, full of compassion for the lovely sufferer, and
rejoicing in the calm tranquillity that had just taken possession of
her, when a little girl, the only child of Mrs. Hammond, opened the
street-door to the rap of the bailiff He said he wanted to speak with
Miss Melville, and the child answered that she would go tell her mother.
So saying, she advanced to the door of the back-room upon the
ground-floor, in which Emily lay; but the moment it was opened, instead
of waiting for the appearance of the mother, the bailiff entered along
with the girl.

Mrs. Hammond looked up. "Who are you?" said she. "Why do you come in
here? Hush! be quiet!'

"I must speak with Miss Melville."

"Indeed, but you must not. Tell me your business. The poor child has
been light-headed all day. She has just fallen asleep, and must not be
disturbed."

"That is no business of mine. I must obey orders."

"Orders? Whose orders? What is it you mean?"

At this moment Emily opened her eyes. "What noise is that? Pray let me
be quiet."

"Miss, I want to speak with you. I have got a writ against you for
eleven hundred pounds at the suit of squire Tyrrel."

At these words both Mrs. Hammond and Emily were dumb. The latter was
scarcely able to annex any meaning to the intelligence; and, though Mrs.
Hammond was somewhat better acquainted with the sort of language that
was employed, yet in this strange and unexpected connection it was
almost as mysterious to her as to poor Emily herself.

"A writ? How can she be in Mr. Tyrrel's debt? A writ against a child!"

"It is no signification putting your questions to us. We only do as we
are directed. There is our authority. Look at it."

"Lord Almighty!" exclaimed Mrs. Hammond, "what does this mean? It is
impossible Mr. Tyrrel should have sent you."

"Good woman, none of your jabber to us! Cannot you read?"

"This is all a trick! The paper is forged! It is a vile contrivance to
get the poor orphan out of the hands of those with whom only she can be
safe. Proceed upon it at your peril!"

"Rest you content; that is exactly what we mean to do. Take my word, we
know very well what we are about."

"Why, you would not tear her from her bed? I tell you, she is in a high
fever; she is light-headed; it would be death to remove her! You are
bailiffs, are not you? You are not murderers?"

"The law says nothing about that. We have orders to take her sick or
well. We will do her no harm except so far as we must perform our
office, be it how it will."

"Where would you take her? What is it you mean to do?"

"To the county jail. Bullock, go, order a post-chaise from the Griffin!"

"Stay, I say! Give no such orders! Wait only three hours; I will send
off a messenger express to squire Falkland, and I am sure he will
satisfy you as to any harm that can come to you, without its being
necessary to take the poor child to jail."

"We have particular directions against that. We are not at liberty to
lose a minute. Why are not you gone? Order the horses to be put to
immediately!"

Emily had listened to the course of this conversation, which had
sufficiently explained to her whatever was enigmatical in the first
appearance of the bailiffs. The painful and incredible reality that was
thus presented effectually dissipated the illusions of frenzy to which
she had just been a prey. "My dear Madam," said she to Mrs. Hammond, "do
not harass yourself with useless efforts. I am very sorry for all the
trouble I have given you. But my misfortune is inevitable. Sir, if you
will step into the next room, I will dress myself, and attend you
immediately."

Mrs. Hammond began to be equally aware that her struggles were to no
purpose; but she could not be equally patient. At one moment she raved
upon the brutality of Mr. Tyrrel, whom she affirmed to be a devil
incarnate, and not a man. At another she expostulated, with bitter
invective, against the hardheartedness of the bailiff, and exhorted him
to mix some humanity and moderation with the discharge of his function;
but he was impenetrable to all she could urge. In the mean while Emily
yielded with the sweetest resignation to an inevitable evil. Mrs.
Hammond insisted that, at least, they should permit her to attend her
young lady in the chaise; and the bailiff, though the orders he had
received were so peremptory that he dared not exercise his discretion as
to the execution of the writ, began to have some apprehensions of
danger, and was willing to admit of any precaution that was not in
direct hostility to his functions. For the rest he understood, that it
was in all cases dangerous to allow sickness, or apparent unfitness for
removal, as a sufficient cause to interrupt a direct process; and that,
accordingly, in all doubtful questions and presumptive murders, the
practice of the law inclined, with a laudable partiality, to the
vindication of its own officers. In addition to these general rules, he
was influenced by the positive injunctions and assurances of Swineard,
and the terror which, through a circle of many miles, was annexed to the
name of Tyrrel. Before they departed, Mrs. Hammond despatched a
messenger with a letter of three lines to Mr. Falkland, informing him of
this extraordinary event. Mr. Falkland was from home when the messenger
arrived, and not expected to return till the second day; accident seemed
in this instance to favour the vengeance of Mr. Tyrrel, for he had
himself been too much under the dominion of an uncontrollable fury, to
take a circumstance of this sort into his estimate.

The forlorn state of these poor women, who were conducted, the one by
compulsion, the other a volunteer, to a scene so little adapted to their
accommodation as that of a common jail, may easily be imagined. Mrs.
Hammond, however, was endowed with a masculine courage and impetuosity
of spirit, eminently necessary in the difficulties they had to
encounter. She was in some degree fitted by a sanguine temper, and an
impassioned sense of injustice, for the discharge of those very offices
which sobriety and calm reflection might have prescribed. The health of
Miss Melville was materially affected by the surprise and removal she
had undergone at the very time that repose was most necessary for her
preservation. Her fever became more violent; her delirium was stronger;
and the tortures of her imagination were proportioned to the
unfavourableness of the state in which the removal had been effected. It
was highly improbable that she could recover.

In the moments of suspended reason she was perpetually calling on the
name of Falkland. Mr. Falkland, she said, was her first and only love,
and he should be her husband. A moment after she exclaimed upon him in a
disconsolate, yet reproachful tone, for his unworthy deference to the
prejudices of the world. It was very cruel of him to show himself so
proud, and tell her that he would never consent to marry a beggar. But,
if he were proud, she was determined to be proud too. He should see that
she would not conduct herself like a slighted maiden, and that, though
he could reject her, it was not in his power to break her heart. At
another time she imagined she saw Mr. Tyrrel and his engine Grimes,
their hands and garments dropping with blood: and the pathetic
reproaches she vented against them might have affected a heart of stone.
Then the figure of Falkland presented itself to her distracted fancy,
deformed with wounds, and of a deadly paleness, and she shrieked with
agony, while she exclaimed that such was the general hardheartedness,
that no one would make the smallest exertion for his rescue. In such
vicissitudes of pain, perpetually imagining to her self unkindness,
insult, conspiracy, and murder, she passed a considerable part of two
days.

On the evening of the second Mr. Falkland arrived, accompanied by Doctor
Wilson, the physician by whom she had previously been attended. The
scene he was called upon to witness was such as to be most exquisitely
agonising to a man of his acute sensibility. The news of the arrest had
given him an inexpressible shock; he was transported out of himself at
the unexampled malignity of its author. But, when he saw the figure of
Miss Melville, haggard, and a warrant of death written in her
countenance, a victim to the diabolical passions of her kinsman, it
seemed too much to be endured. When he entered, she was in the midst of
one of her fits of delirium, and immediately mistook her visitors for
two assassins. She asked, where they had hid her Falkland, her lord, her
life, her husband! and demanded that they should restore to her his
mangled corpse, that she might embrace him with her dying arms, breathe
her last upon his lips, and be buried in the same grave. She reproached
them with the sordidness of their conduct in becoming the tools of her
vile cousin, who had deprived her of her reason, and would never be
contented till he had murdered her. Mr. Falkland tore himself away from
this painful scene, and, leaving Doctor Wilson with his patient, desired
him, when he had given the necessary directions, to follow him to his
inn.

The perpetual hurry of spirits in which Miss Melville had been kept for
several days, by the nature of her indisposition, was extremely
exhausting to her; and, in about an hour from the visit of Mr. Falkland,
her delirium subsided, and left her in so low a state as to render it
difficult to perceive any signs of life. Doctor Wilson, who had
withdrawn, to soothe, if possible, the disturbed and impatient thoughts
of Mr. Falkland, was summoned afresh upon this change of symptoms, and
sat by the bed-side during the remainder of the night. The situation of
his patient was such, as to keep him in momentary apprehension of her
decease. While Miss Melville lay in this feeble and exhausted condition,
Mrs. Hammond betrayed every token of the tenderest anxiety. Her
sensibility was habitually of the acutest sort, and the qualities of
Emily were such as powerfully to fix her affection. She loved her like a
mother. Upon the present occasion, every sound, every motion, made her
tremble. Doctor Wilson had introduced another nurse, in consideration of
the incessant fatigue Mrs. Hammond had undergone; and he endeavoured, by
representations, and even by authority, to compel her to quit the
apartment of the patient. But she was uncontrollable; and he at length
found that he should probably do her more injury, by the violence that
would be necessary to separate her from the suffering innocent, than by
allowing her to follow her inclination. Her eye was a thousand times
turned, with the most eager curiosity, upon the countenance of Doctor
Wilson, without her daring to breathe a question respecting his opinion,
lest he should answer her by a communication of the most fatal tidings.
In the mean time she listened with the deepest attention to every thing
that dropped either from the physician or the nurse, hoping to collect
as it were from some oblique hint, the intelligence which she had not
courage expressly to require.

Towards morning the state of the patient seemed to take a favourable
turn. She dozed for near two hours, and, when she awoke, appeared
perfectly calm and sensible. Understanding that Mr. Falkland had
brought the physician to attend her, and was himself in her
neighbourhood, she requested to see him. Mr. Falkland had gone in the
mean time, with one of his tenants, to bail the debt, and now entered
the prison to enquire whether the young lady might be safely removed,
from her present miserable residence, to a more airy and commodious
apartment. When he appeared, the sight of him revived in the mind of
Miss Melville an imperfect recollection of the wanderings of her
delirium. She covered her face with her fingers, and betrayed the most
expressive confusion, while she thanked him, with her usual unaffected
simplicity, for the trouble he had taken. She hoped she should not give
him much more; she thought she should get better. It was a shame, she
said, if a young and lively girl, as she was, could not contrive to
outlive the trifling misfortunes to which she had been subjected. But,
while she said this, she was still extremely weak. She tried to assume a
cheerful countenance; but it was a faint effort, which the feeble state
of her frame did not seem sufficient to support. Mr. Falkland and the
doctor joined to request her to keep herself quiet, and avoid for the
present all occasions of exertion.

Encouraged by these appearances, Mrs. Hammond ventured to follow the two
gentlemen out of the room, in order to learn from the physician what
hopes he entertained. Doctor Wilson acknowledged, that he found his
patient at first in a very unfavourable situation, that the symptoms
were changed for the better, and that he was not without some
expectation of her recovery. He added, however, that he could answer for
nothing, that the next twelve hours would be exceedingly critical, but
that if she did not grow worse before morning, he would then undertake
for her life. Mrs. Hammond, who had hitherto seen nothing but despair,
now became frantic with joy. She burst into tears of transport, blessed
the physician in the most emphatic and impassioned terms, and uttered a
thousand extravagancies. Doctor Wilson seized this opportunity to press
her to give herself a little repose, to which she consented, a bed being
first procured for her in the room next to Miss Melville's, she having
charged the nurse to give her notice of any alteration in the state of
the patient.

Mrs. Hammond enjoyed an uninterrupted sleep of several hours. It was
already night, when she was awaked by an unusual bustle in the next
room. She listened for a few moments, and then determined to go and
discover the occasion of it. As she opened her door for that purpose,
she met the nurse coming to her. The countenance of the messenger told
her what it was she had to communicate, without the use of words. She
hurried to the bed-side, and found Miss Melville expiring. The
appearances that had at first been so encouraging were of short
duration. The calm of the morning proved to be only a sort of lightening
before death. In a few hours the patient grew worse. The bloom of her
countenance faded; she drew her breath with difficulty; and her eyes
became fixed. Doctor Wilson came in at this period, and immediately
perceived that all was over. She was for some time in convulsions; but,
these subsiding, she addressed the physician with a composed, though
feeble voice. She thanked him for his attention; and expressed the most
lively sense of her obligations to Mr. Falkland. She sincerely forgave
her cousin, and hoped he might never be visited by too acute a
recollection of his barbarity to her. She would have been contented to
live. Few persons had a sincerer relish of the pleasures of life; but
she was well pleased to die, rather than have become the wife of Grimes.
As Mrs. Hammond entered, she turned her countenance towards her, and
with an affectionate expression repeated her name. This was her last
word; in less than two hours from that time she breathed her last in the
arms of this faithful friend.




CHAPTER XI.


Such was the fate of Miss Emily Melville. Perhaps tyranny never
exhibited a more painful memorial of the detestation in which it
deserves to be held. The idea irresistibly excited in every spectator of
the scene, was that of regarding Mr. Tyrrel as the most diabolical
wretch that had ever dishonoured the human form. The very attendants
upon this house of oppression, for the scene was acted upon too public a
stage not to be generally understood, expressed their astonishment and
disgust at his unparalleled cruelty.

If such were the feelings of men bred to the commission of injustice, it
is difficult to say what must have been those of Mr. Falkland. He raved,
he swore, he beat his head, he rent up his hair. He was unable to
continue in one posture, and to remain in one place. He burst away from
the spot with vehemence, as if he sought to leave behind him his
recollection and his existence. He seemed to tear up the ground with
fierceness and rage. He returned soon again. He approached the sad
remains of what had been Emily, and gazed on them with such intentness,
that his eyes appeared, ready to burst from their sockets. Acute and
exquisite as were his notions of virtue and honour, he could not prevent
himself from reproaching the system of nature, for having given birth to
such a monster as Tyrrel. He was ashamed of himself for wearing the same
form. He could not think of the human species with patience. He foamed
with indignation against the laws of the universe, that did not permit
him to crush such reptiles at a blow, as we would crush so many noxious
insects. It was necessary to guard him like a madman.

The whole office of judging what was proper to be done under the present
circumstances devolved upon Doctor Wilson. The doctor was a man of cool
and methodical habits of acting. One of the first ideas that suggested
itself to him was, that Miss Melvile was a branch of the family of
Tyrrel. He did not doubt of the willingness of Mr. Falkland to discharge
every expense that might be further incident to the melancholy remains
of this unfortunate victim; but he conceived that the laws of fashion
and decorum required some notification of the event to be made to the
head of the family. Perhaps, too, he had an eye to his interest in his
profession, and was reluctant to expose himself to the resentment of a
person of Mr. Tyrrel's consideration in the neighbourhood. But, with
this weakness, he had nevertheless some feelings in common with the rest
of the world, and must have suffered considerable violence, before he
could have persuaded himself to be the messenger; beside which, he did
not think it right in the present situation to leave Mr. Falkland.

Doctor Wilson no sooner mentioned these ideas, than they seemed to make
a sudden impression on Mrs. Hammond, and she earnestly requested that
she might be permitted to carry the intelligence. The proposal was
unexpected; but the doctor did not very obstinately refuse his assent.
She was determined, she said, to see what sort of impression the
catastrophe would make upon the author of it; and she promised to
comport herself with moderation and civility. The journey was soon
performed.

"I am come, sir," said she to Mr. Tyrrel, "to inform you that your
cousin, Miss Melville, died this afternoon."

"Died?"

"Yes, sir. I saw her die. She died in these arms."

"Died? Who killed her? What do you mean?"

"Who? Is it for you to ask that question? Your cruelty and malice killed
her!"

"Me?--my?--Poh! she is not dead--it cannot be--it is not a week since
she left this house."

"Do not you believe me? I say she is dead!"

"Have a care, woman! this is no matter for jesting. No: though she used
me ill, I would not believe her dead for all the world!"

Mrs. Hammond shook her head in a manner expressive at once of grief and
indignation.

"No, no, no, no! I will never believe that!--No, never!"

"Will you come with me, and convince your eyes? It is a sight worthy of
you; and will be a feast to such a heart as yours!"--Saying this, Mrs.
Hammond offered her hand, as if to conduct him to the spot.

Mr. Tyrrel shrunk back.

"If she be dead, what is that to me? Am I to answer for every thing that
goes wrong in the world?--What do you come here for? Why bring your
messages to me?"

"To whom should I bring them but to her kinsman,--and her murderer."

"Murderer?--Did I employ knives or pistols? Did I give her poison? I did
nothing but what the law allows. If she be dead, nobody can say that I
am to blame!"

"To blame?--All the world will abhor and curse you. Were you such a
fool as to think, because men pay respect to wealth and rank, this would
extend to such a deed? They will laugh at so barefaced a cheat. The
meanest beggar will spurn and spit at you. Ay, you may well stand
confounded at what you have done. I will proclaim you to the whole
world, and you will be obliged to fly the very face of a human
creature!"

"Good woman," said Mr. Tyrrel, extremely humbled, "talk no more in this
strain!--Emmy is not dead! I am sure--I hope--she is not dead!--Tell me
that you have only been deceiving me, and I will forgive you every
thing--I will forgive her--I will take her into favour--I will do any
thing you please!--I never meant her any harm!"

"I tell you she is dead! You have murdered the sweetest innocent that
lived! Can you bring her back to life, as you have driven her out of it?
If you could, I would kneel to you twenty times a day! What is it you
have done?--Miserable wretch! did you think you could do and undo, and
change things this way and that, as you pleased?"

The reproaches of Mrs. Hammond were the first instance in which Mr.
Tyrrel was made to drink the full cup of retribution. This was, however,
only a specimen of a long series of contempt, abhorrence, and insult,
that was reserved for him. The words of Mrs. Hammond were prophetic. It
evidently appeared, that though wealth and hereditary elevation operate
as an apology for many delinquencies, there are some which so
irresistibly address themselves to the indignation of mankind, that,
like death, they level all distinctions, and reduce their perpetrator to
an equality with the most indigent and squalid of his species. Against
Mr. Tyrrel, as the tyrannical and unmanly murderer of Emily, those who
dared not venture the unreserved avowal of their sentiments muttered
curses, deep, not loud; while the rest joined in an universal cry of
abhorrence and execration. He stood astonished at the novelty of his
situation. Accustomed as he had been to the obedience and trembling
homage of mankind, he had imagined they would be perpetual, and that no
excess on his part would ever be potent enough to break the enchantment.
Now he looked round, and saw sullen detestation in every face, which
with difficulty restrained itself, and upon the slightest provocation
broke forth with an impetuous tide, and swept away the mounds of
subordination and fear. His large estate could not purchase civility
from the gentry, the peasantry, scarcely from his own servants. In the
indignation of all around him he found a ghost that haunted him with
every change of place, and a remorse that stung his conscience, and
exterminated his peace. The neighbourhood appeared more and more every
day to be growing too hot for him to endure, and it became evident that
he would ultimately be obliged to quit the country. Urged by the
flagitiousness of this last example, people learned to recollect every
other instance of his excesses, and it was, no doubt, a fearful
catalogue that rose up in judgment against him. It seemed as if the
sense of public resentment had long been gathering strength unperceived,
and now burst forth into insuppressible violence.

There was scarcely a human being upon whom this sort of retribution
could have sat more painfully than upon Mr. Tyrrel. Though he had not a
consciousness of innocence prompting him continually to recoil from the
detestation of mankind as a thing totally unallied to his character, yet
the imperiousness of his temper and the constant experience he had had
of the pliability of other men, prepared him to feel the general and
undisguised condemnation into which he was sunk with uncommon emotions
of anger and impatience. That he, at the beam of whose eye every
countenance fell, and to whom in the fierceness of his wrath no one was
daring enough to reply, should now be regarded with avowed dislike, and
treated with unceremonious censure, was a thing he could not endure to
recollect or believe. Symptoms of the universal disgust smote him at
every instant, and at every blow he writhed with intolerable anguish.
His rage was unbounded and raving. He repelled every attack with the
fiercest indignation; while the more he struggled, the more desperate
his situation appeared to become. At length he determined to collect his
strength for a decisive effort, and to meet the whole tide of public
opinion in a single scene.

In pursuance of these thoughts he resolved to repair, without delay, to
the rural assembly which I have already mentioned in the course of my
story. Miss Melville had now been dead one month. Mr. Falkland had been
absent the last week in a distant part of the country, and was not
expected to return for a week longer. Mr. Tyrrel willingly embraced the
opportunity, trusting, if he could now effect his re-establishment, that
he should easily preserve the ground he had gained, even in the face of
his formidable rival. Mr. Tyrrel was not deficient in courage; but he
conceived the present to be too important an epoch in his life to allow
him to make any unnecessary risk in his chance for future ease and
importance.

There was a sort of bustle that took place at his entrance into the
assembly, it having been agreed by the gentlemen of the assembly, that
Mr. Tyrrel was to be refused admittance, as a person with whom they did
not choose to associate. This vote had already been notified to him by
letter by the master of the ceremonies, but the intelligence was rather
calculated, with a man of Mr. Tyrrel's disposition, to excite defiance
than to overawe. At the door of the assembly he was personally met by
the master of the ceremonies, who had perceived the arrival of an
equipage, and who now endeavoured to repeat his prohibition: but he was
thrust aside by Mr. Tyrrel with an air of native authority and ineffable
contempt. As he entered; every eye was turned upon him. Presently all
the gentlemen in the room assembled round him. Some endeavoured to
hustle him, and others began to expostulate. But he found the secret
effectually to silence the one set, and to shake off the other. His
muscular form, the well-known eminence of his intellectual powers, the
long habits to which every man was formed of acknowledging his
ascendancy, were all in his favour. He considered himself as playing a
desperate stake, and had roused all the energies he possessed, to enable
him to do justice to so interesting a transaction. Disengaged from the
insects that at first pestered him, he paced up and down the room with a
magisterial stride, and flashed an angry glance on every side. He then
broke silence. "If any one had any thing to say to him, he should know
where and how to answer him. He would advise any such person, however,
to consider well what he was about. If any man imagined he had any thing
personally to complain of, it was very well. But he did expect that
nobody there would be ignorant and raw enough to meddle with what was no
business of theirs, and intrude into the concerns of any man's private
family."

This being a sort of defiance, one and another gentleman advanced to
answer it. He that was first began to speak; but Mr. Tyrrel, by the
expression of his countenance and a peremptory tone, by well-timed
interruptions and pertinent insinuations, caused him first to hesitate,
and then to be silent. He seemed to be fast advancing to the triumph he
had promised himself. The whole company were astonished. They felt the
same abhorrence and condemnation of his character; but they could not
help admiring the courage and resources he displayed upon the present
occasion. They could without difficulty have concentred afresh their
indignant feelings, but they seemed to want a leader.

At this critical moment Mr. Falkland entered the room. Mere accident had
enabled him to return sooner than he expected.

Both he and Mr. Tyrrel reddened at sight of each other. He advanced
towards Mr. Tyrrel without a moment's pause, and in a peremptory voice
asked him what he did there?

"Here? What do you mean by that? This place is as free to me as you, and
you are the last person to whom I shall deign to give an account of
myself."

"Sir, the place is not free to you. Do not you know, you have been voted
out? Whatever were your rights, your infamous conduct has forfeited
them."

"Mr. what do you call yourself, if you have anything to say to me,
choose a proper time and place. Do not think to put on your bullying
airs under shelter of this company! I will not endure it."

"You are mistaken, sir. This public scene is the only place where I can
have any thing to say to you. If you would not hear the universal
indignation of mankind, you must not come into the society of men.--Miss
Melville!--Shame upon you, inhuman, unrelenting tyrant! Can you hear her
name, and not sink into the earth? Can you retire into solitude, and not
see her pale and patient ghost rising to reproach you? Can you recollect
her virtues, her innocence, her spotless manners, her unresentful
temper, and not run distracted with remorse? Have you not killed her in
the first bloom of her youth? Can you bear to think that she now lies
mouldering in the grave through your cursed contrivance, that deserved a
crown, ten thousand times more than you deserve to live? And do you
expect that mankind will ever forget, or forgive such a deed? Go,
miserable wretch; think yourself too happy that you are permitted to fly
the face of man! Why, what a pitiful figure do you make at this moment!
Do you think that any thing could bring so hardened a wretch as you are
to shrink from reproach, if your conscience were not in confederacy with
them that reproached you? And were you fool enough to believe that any
obstinacy, however determined, could enable you to despise the keen
rebuke of justice? Go, shrink into your miserable self! Begone, and let
me never be blasted with your sight again!"

And here, incredible as it may appear, Mr. Tyrrel began to obey his
imperious censurer. His looks were full of wildness and horror; his
limbs trembled; and his tongue refused its office. He felt no power of
resisting the impetuous torrent of reproach that was poured upon him. He
hesitated; he was ashamed of his own defeat; he seemed to wish to deny
it. But his struggles were ineffectual; every attempt perished in the
moment it was made. The general voice was eager to abash him. As his
confusion became more visible, the outcry increased. It swelled
gradually to hootings, tumult, and a deafening noise of indignation. At
length he willingly retired from the public scene, unable any longer to
endure the sensations it inflicted.

In about an hour and a half he returned. No precaution had been taken
against this incident, for nothing could be more unexpected. In the
interval he had intoxicated himself with large draughts of brandy. In a
moment he was in a part of the room where Mr. Falkland was standing, and
with one blow of his muscular arm levelled him with the earth. The blow
however was not stunning, and Mr. Falkland rose again immediately. It is
obvious to perceive how unequal he must have been in this species of
contest. He was scarcely risen before Mr. Tyrrel repeated his blow. Mr.
Falkland was now upon his guard, and did not fall. But the blows of his
adversary were redoubled with a rapidity difficult to conceive, and Mr.
Falkland was once again brought to the earth. In this situation Mr.
Tyrrel kicked his prostrate enemy, and stooped apparently with the
intention of dragging him along the floor. All this passed in a moment,
and the gentlemen present had not time to recover their surprise. They
now interfered, and Mr. Tyrrel once more quitted the apartment.

It is difficult to conceive any event more terrible to the individual
upon whom it fell, than the treatment which Mr. Falkland in this
instance experienced. Every passion of his life was calculated to make
him feel it more acutely. He had repeatedly exerted an uncommon energy
and prudence, to prevent the misunderstanding between Mr. Tyrrel and
himself from proceeding to extremities; but in vain! It was closed with
a catastrophe, exceeding all that he had feared, or that the most
penetrating foresight could have suggested. To Mr. Falkland disgrace was
worse than death. The slightest breath of dishonour would have stung him
to the very soul. What must it have been with this complication of
ignominy, base, humiliating, and public? Could Mr. Tyrrel have
understood the evil he inflicted, even he, under all his circumstances
of provocation, could scarcely have perpetrated it. Mr. Falkland's mind
was full of uproar like the war of contending elements, and of such
suffering as casts contempt on the refinements of inventive cruelty. He
wished for annihilation, to lie down in eternal oblivion, in an
insensibility, which, compared with what he experienced, was scarcely
less enviable than beatitude itself. Horror, detestation, revenge,
inexpressible longings to shake off the evil, and a persuasion that in
this case all effort was powerless, filled his soul even to bursting.

One other event closed the transactions of this memorable evening. Mr.
Falkland was baffled of the vengeance that yet remained to him. Mr.
Tyrrel was found by some of the company dead in the street, having been
murdered at the distance of a few yards from the assembly house.




CHAPTER XII.


I shall endeavour to state the remainder of this narrative in the words
of Mr. Collins. The reader has already had occasion to perceive that Mr.
Collins was a man of no vulgar order; and his reflections on the subject
were uncommonly judicious.

"This day was the crisis of Mr. Falkland's history. From hence took its
beginning that gloomy and unsociable melancholy, of which he has since
been the victim. No two characters can be in certain respects more
strongly contrasted, than the Mr. Falkland of a date prior and
subsequent to these events. Hitherto he had been attended by a fortune
perpetually prosperous. His mind was sanguine; full of that undoubting
confidence in its own powers which prosperity is qualified to produce.
Though the habits of his life were those of a serious and sublime
visionary they were nevertheless full of cheerfulness and tranquillity.
But from this moment, his pride, and the lofty adventurousness of his
spirit, were effectually subdued. From an object of envy he was changed
into an object of compassion. Life, which hitherto no one had more
exquisitely enjoyed, became a burden to him. No more self-complacency,
no more rapture, no more self-approving and heart-transporting
benevolence! He who had lived beyond any man upon the grand and
animating reveries of the imagination, seemed now to have no visions but
of anguish and despair. His case was peculiarly worthy of sympathy,
since, no doubt, if rectitude and purity of disposition could give a
title to happiness, few men could exhibit a more consistent and powerful
claim than Mr. Falkland.

"He was too deeply pervaded with the idle and groundless romances of
chivalry, ever to forget the situation, humiliating and dishonourable
according to his ideas, in which he had been placed upon this occasion.
There is a mysterious sort of divinity annexed to the person of a true
knight, that makes any species of brute violence committed upon it
indelible and immortal. To be knocked down, cuffed, kicked, dragged
along the floor! Sacred heaven, the memory of such a treatment was not
to be endured! No future lustration could ever remove the stain: and,
what was perhaps still worse in the present case, the offender having
ceased to exist, the lustration which the laws of knight-errantry
prescribe was rendered impossible.

"In some future period of human improvement, it is probable, that that
calamity will be in a manner unintelligible, which in the present
instance contributed to tarnish and wither the excellence of one of the
most elevated and amiable of human minds. If Mr. Falkland had reflected
with perfect accuracy upon the case, he would probably have been able
to look down with indifference upon a wound, which, as it was, pierced
to his very vitals. How much more dignity, than in the modern duellist,
do we find in Themistocles, the most gallant of the Greeks; who, when
Eurybiades, his commander in chief, in answer to some of his
remonstrances, lifted his cane over him with a menacing air, accosted
him in that noble apostrophe, 'Strike, but hear!'

"How would a man of true discernment in such a case reply to his brutal
assailant? 'I make it my boast that I can endure calamity and pain:
shall I not be able to endure the trifling inconvenience that your folly
can inflict upon me? Perhaps a human being would be more accomplished,
if he understood the science of personal defence; but how few would be
the occasions upon which he would be called to exert it? How few persons
would he encounter so unjust and injurious as you, if his own conduct
were directed by the principles of reason and benevolence? Beside, how
narrow would be the use of this science when acquired? It will scarcely
put the man of delicate make and petty stature upon a level with the
athletic pugilist; and, if it did in some measure secure me against the
malice of a single adversary, still my person and my life, so far as
mere force is concerned, would always be at the mercy of two. Further
than immediate defence against actual violence, it could never be of use
to me. The man who can deliberately meet his adversary for the purpose
of exposing the person of one or both of them to injury, tramples upon
every principle of reason and equity. Duelling is the vilest of all
egotism, treating the public, who has a claim to all my powers and
exertions, as if it were nothing, and myself, or rather an
unintelligible chimera I annex to myself, as if it were entitled to my
exclusive attention. I am unable to cope with you: what then? Can that
circumstance dishonour me? No; I can only be dishonoured by perpetrating
an unjust action. My honour is in my own keeping, beyond the reach of
all mankind. Strike! I am passive. No injury that you can inflict, shall
provoke me to expose you or myself to unnecessary evil. I refuse that;
but I am not therefore pusillanimous: when I refuse any danger or
suffering by which the general good may be promoted, then brand me for a
coward!

"These reasonings, however simple and irresistible they must be found by
a dispassionate enquirer, are little reflected on by the world at large,
and were most of all uncongenial to the prejudices of Mr. Falkland.

"But the public disgrace and chastisement that had been imposed upon
him, intolerable as they were to be recollected, were not the whole of
the mischief that redounded to our unfortunate patron from the
transactions of that day. It was presently whispered that he was no
other than the murderer of his antagonist. This rumour was of too much
importance to the very continuance of his life, to justify its being
concealed from him. He heard it with inexpressible astonishment and
horror; it formed a dreadful addition to the load of intellectual
anguish that already oppressed him. No man had ever held his reputation
more dear than Mr. Falkland; and now, in one day, he was fallen under
the most exquisite calamities, a complicated personal insult, and the
imputation of the foulest of crimes. He might have fled; for no one was
forward to proceed against a man so adored as Mr. Falkland, or in
revenge of one so universally execrated as Mr. Tyrrel. But flight he
disdained. In the mean time the affair was of the most serious
magnitude, and the rumour unchecked seemed daily to increase in
strength. Mr. Falkland appeared sometimes inclined to adopt such steps
as might have been best calculated to bring the imputation to a speedy
trial. But he probably feared, by too direct an appeal to judicature, to
render more precise an imputation, the memory of which he deprecated; at
the same time that he was sufficiently willing to meet the severest
scrutiny, and, if he could not hope to have it forgotten that he had
ever been accused, to prove in the most satisfactory manner that the
accusation was unjust.

"The neighbouring magistrates at length conceived it necessary to take
some steps upon the subject. Without causing Mr. Falkland to be
apprehended, they sent to desire he would appear before them at one of
their meetings. The proceeding being thus opened, Mr. Falkland expressed
his hope that, if the business were likely to stop there, their
investigation might at least be rendered as solemn as possible. The
meeting was numerous; every person of a respectable class in society was
admitted to be an auditor; the whole town, one of the most considerable
in the county, was apprised of the nature of the business. Few trials,
invested with all the forms of judgment, have excited so general an
interest. A trial, under the present circumstances, was scarcely
attainable; and it seemed to be the wish both of principal and umpires,
to give to this transaction all the momentary notoriety and decisiveness
of a trial.

"The magistrates investigated the particulars of the story. Mr.
Falkland, it appeared, had left the rooms immediately after his
assailant; and though he had been attended by one or two of the
gentlemen to his inn, it was proved that he had left them upon some
slight occasion, as soon as he arrived at it, and that, when they
enquired for him of the waiters, he had already mounted his horse and
ridden home.

"By the nature of the case, no particular facts could be stated in
balance against these. As soon as they had been sufficiently detailed,
Mr. Falkland therefore proceeded to his defence. Several copies of his
defence were-made, and Mr. Falkland seemed, for a short time, to have
had the idea of sending it to the press, though, for some reason or
other, he afterwards suppressed it. I have one of the copies in my
possession, and I will read it to you."

Saying this, Mr. Collins rose, and took it from a private drawer in his
escritoire. During this action he appeared to recollect himself. He did
not, in the strict sense of the word, hesitate; but he was prompted to
make some apology for what he was doing.

"You seem never to have heard of this memorable transaction; and,
indeed, that is little to be wondered at, since the good nature of the
world is interested in suppressing it, and it is deemed a disgrace to a
man to have defended himself from a criminal imputation, though with
circumstances the most satisfactory and honourable. It may be supposed
that this suppression is particularly acceptable to Mr. Falkland; and I
should not have acted in contradiction to his modes of thinking in
communicating the story to you, had there not been circumstances of
peculiar urgency, that seemed to render the communication desirable."
Saying this, he proceeded to read from the paper in his hand.

"Gentlemen,

"I stand here accused of a crime, the most black that any human creature
is capable of perpetrating. I am innocent. I have no fear that I shall
fail to make every person in this company acknowledge my innocence. In
the mean time, what must be my feelings? Conscious as I am of deserving
approbation and not censure, of having passed my life in acts of
justice and philanthropy, can any thing be more deplorable than for me
to answer to a charge of murder? So wretched is my situation, that I
cannot accept your gratuitous acquittal, if you should be disposed to
bestow it. I must answer to an imputation, the very thought of which is
ten thousand times worse to me than death. I must exert the whole energy
of my mind, to prevent my being ranked with the vilest of men.

"Gentlemen, this is a situation in which a man may be allowed to boast.
Accursed situation! No man need envy me the vile and polluted triumph I
am now to gain! I have called no witnesses to my character. Great God!
what sort of character is that which must be supported by witnesses?
But, if I must speak, look round the company, ask of every one present,
enquire of your own hearts! Not one word of reproach was ever whispered
against me. I do not hesitate to call upon those who have known me most,
to afford me the most honourable testimony.

"My life has been spent in the keenest and most unintermitted
sensibility to reputation. I am almost indifferent as to what shall be
the event of this day. I would not open my mouth upon the occasion, if
my life were the only thing that was at stake. It is not in the power of
your decision to restore to me my unblemished reputation, to obliterate
the disgrace I have suffered, or to prevent it from being remembered
that I have been brought to examination upon a charge of murder. Your
decision can never have the efficacy to prevent the miserable remains of
my existence from being the most intolerable of all burthens.

"I am accused of having committed murder upon the body of Barnabas
Tyrrel. I would most joyfully have given every farthing I possess, and
devoted myself to perpetual beggary, to have preserved his life. His
life was precious to me, beyond that of all mankind. In my opinion, the
greatest injustice committed by his unknown assassin was that of
defrauding me of my just revenge. I confess that I would have called him
out to the field, and that our encounter should not have been terminated
but by the death of one or both of us. This would have been a pitiful
and inadequate compensation for his unparalleled insult, but it was all
that remained.

"I ask for no pity, but I must openly declare that never was any
misfortune so horrible as mine. I would willingly have taken refuge from
the recollection of that night in a voluntary death. Life was now
stripped of all those recommendations, for the sake of which it was dear
to me. But even this consolation is denied me. I am compelled to drag
for ever the intolerable load of existence, upon penalty, if at any
period, however remote, I shake it off, of having that impatience
regarded as confirming a charge of murder. Gentlemen, if by your
decision you could take away my life, without that act being connected
with my disgrace, I would bless the cord that stopped the breath of my
existence for ever.

"You all know how easily I might have fled from this purgation. If I had
been guilty, should I not have embraced the opportunity? But, as it was,
I could not. Reputation has been the idol, the jewel of my life. I could
never have borne to think that a human creature, in the remotest part of
the globe, should believe that I was a criminal. Alas! what a deity it
is that I have chosen for my worship! I have entailed upon myself
everlasting agony and despair!

"I have but one word to add. Gentlemen, I charge you to do me the
imperfect justice that is in your power! My life is a worthless thing.
But my honour, the empty remains of honour I have now to boast, is in
your judgment, and you will each of you, from this day, have imposed
upon yourselves the task of its vindicators. It is little that you can
do for me; but it is not less your duty to do that little. May that God
who is the fountain of honour and good prosper and protect you! The man
who now stands before you is devoted to perpetual barrenness and blast!
He has nothing to hope for beyond the feeble consolation of this day!"

"You will easily imagine that Mr. Falkland was discharged with every
circumstance of credit. Nothing is more to be deplored in human
institutions, than that the ideas of mankind should have annexed a
sentiment of disgrace to a purgation thus satisfactory and decisive. No
one entertained the shadow of a doubt upon the subject, and yet a mere
concurrence of circumstances made it necessary that the best of men
should be publicly put on his defence, as if really under suspicion of
an atrocious crime. It may be granted indeed that Mr. Falkland had his
faults, but those very faults placed him at a still further distance
from the criminality in question. He was the fool of honour and fame: a
man whom, in the pursuit of reputation, nothing could divert; who would
have purchased the character of a true, gallant, and undaunted hero, at
the expense of worlds, and who thought every calamity nominal but a
stain upon his honour. How atrociously absurd to suppose any motive
capable of inducing such a man to play the part of a lurking assassin?
How unfeeling to oblige him to defend himself from such an imputation?
Did any man, and, least of all, a man of the purest honour, ever pass in
a moment, from a life unstained by a single act of injury, to the
consummation of human depravity?

"When the decision of the magistrates was declared, a general murmur of
applause and involuntary transport burst forth from every one present.
It was at first low, and gradually became louder. As it was the
expression of rapturous delight, and an emotion disinterested and
divine, so there was an indescribable something in the very sound, that
carried it home to the heart, and convinced every spectator that there
was no merely personal pleasure which ever existed, that would not be
foolish and feeble in the comparison. Every one strove who should most
express his esteem of the amiable accused. Mr. Falkland was no sooner
withdrawn than the gentlemen present determined to give a still further
sanction to the business, by their congratulations. They immediately
named a deputation to wait upon him for that purpose. Every one
concurred to assist the general sentiment. It was a sort of sympathetic
feeling that took hold upon all ranks and degrees. The multitude
received him with huzzas, they took his horses from his carriage,
dragged him along in triumph, and attended him many miles on his return
to his own habitation. It seemed as if a public examination upon a
criminal charge, which had hitherto been considered in every event as a
brand of disgrace, was converted, in the present instance, into an
occasion of enthusiastic adoration and unexampled honour.

"Nothing could reach the heart of Mr. Falkland. He was not insensible to
the general kindness and exertions; but it was too evident that the
melancholy that had taken hold of his mind was invincible.

"It was only a few weeks after this memorable scene that the real
murderer was discovered. Every part of this story was extraordinary. The
real murderer was Hawkins. He was found with his son, under a feigned
name, at a village about thirty miles distant, in want of all the
necessaries of life. He had lived there, from the period of his flight,
in so private a manner, that all the enquiries that had been set on
foot, by the benevolence of Mr. Falkland, or the insatiable malice of
Mr. Tyrrel, had been insufficient to discover him. The first thing that
had led to the detection was a parcel of clothes covered with blood,
that were found in a ditch, and that, when drawn out, were known by the
people of the village to belong to this man. The murder of Mr. Tyrrel
was not a circumstance that could be unknown, and suspicion was
immediately roused. A diligent search being made, the rusty handle, with
part of the blade of a knife, was found thrown in a corner of his
lodging, which, being applied to a piece of the point of a knife that
had been broken in the wound, appeared exactly to correspond. Upon
further enquiry two rustics, who had been accidentally on the spot,
remembered to have seen Hawkins and his son in the town that very
evening and to have called after them, and received no answer, though
they were sure of their persons. Upon this accumulated evidence both
Hawkins and his son were tried, condemned, and afterwards executed. In
the interval between the sentence and execution Hawkins confessed his
guilt with many marks of compunction; though there are persons by whom
this is denied; but I have taken some pains to enquire into the fact,
and am persuaded that their disbelief is precipitate and groundless.

"The cruel injustice that this man had suffered from his village-tyrant
was not forgotten upon the present occasion. It was by a strange
fatality that the barbarous proceedings of Mr. Tyrrel seemed never to
fall short of their completion; and even his death served eventually to
consummate the ruin of a man he hated; a circumstance which, if it could
have come to his knowledge, would perhaps have in some measure consoled
him for his untimely end. This poor Hawkins was surely entitled to some
pity, since his being finally urged to desperation, and brought,
together with his son, to an ignominious fate, was originally owing to
the sturdiness of his virtue and independence. But the compassion of the
public was in a great measure shut against him, as they thought it a
piece of barbarous and unpardonable selfishness, that he had not rather
come boldly forward to meet the consequences of his own conduct, than
suffer a man of so much public worth as Mr. Falkland, and who had been
so desirous of doing him good, to be exposed to the risk of being tried
for a murder that he had committed.

"From this time to the present Mr. Falkland has been nearly such as you
at present see him. Though it be several years since these transactions,
the impression they made is for ever fresh in the mind of our
unfortunate patron. From thenceforward his habits became totally
different. He had before been fond of public scenes, and acting a part
in the midst of the people among whom he immediately resided. He now
made himself a rigid recluse. He had no associates, no friends.
Inconsolable himself, he yet wished to treat others with kindness. There
was a solemn sadness in his manner, attended with the most perfect
gentleness and humanity. Every body respects him, for his benevolence is
unalterable; but there is a stately coldness and reserve in his
behaviour, which makes it difficult for those about him to regard him
with the familiarity of affection. These symptoms are uninterrupted,
except at certain times when his sufferings become intolerable, and he
displays the marks of a furious insanity. At those times his language is
fearful and mysterious, and he seems to figure to himself by turns every
sort of persecution and alarm, which may be supposed to attend upon an
accusation of murder. But, sensible of his own weakness, he is anxious
at such times to withdraw into solitude: and his domestics in general
know nothing of him, but the uncommunicative and haughty, but mild,
dejection that accompanies every thing he does."


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

       *       *       *       *       *




VOLUME THE SECOND.




CHAPTER I.


I have stated the narrative of Mr. Collins, interspersed with such other
information as I was able to collect, with all the exactness that my
memory, assisted by certain memorandums I made at the time, will afford.
I do not pretend to warrant the authenticity of any part of these
memoirs, except so much as fell under my own knowledge, and that part
shall be given with the same simplicity and accuracy, that I would
observe towards a court which was to decide in the last resort upon
every thing dear to me. The same scrupulous fidelity restrains me from
altering the manner of Mr. Collins's narrative to adapt it to the
precepts of my own taste; and it will soon be perceived how essential
that narrative is to the elucidation of my history.

The intention of my friend in this communication was to give me ease;
but he in reality added to my embarrassment. Hitherto I had had no
intercourse with the world and its passions; and, though I was not
totally unacquainted with them as they appear in books, this proved of
little service to me when I came to witness them myself. The case seemed
entirely altered, when the subject of those passions was continually
before my eyes, and the events had happened but the other day as it
were, in the very neighbourhood where I lived. There was a connection
and progress in this narrative, which made it altogether unlike the
little village incidents I had hitherto known. My feelings were
successively interested for the different persons that were brought upon
the scene. My veneration was excited for Mr. Clare, and my applause for
the intrepidity of Mrs. Hammond. I was astonished that any human
creature should be so shockingly perverted as Mr. Tyrrel. I paid the
tribute of my tears to the memory of the artless Miss Melville. I found
a thousand fresh reasons to admire and love Mr. Falkland.

At present I was satisfied with thus considering every incident in its
obvious sense. But the story I had heard was for ever in my thoughts,
and I was peculiarly interested to comprehend its full import. I turned
it a thousand ways, and examined it in every point of view. In the
original communication it appeared sufficiently distinct and
satisfactory; but as I brooded over it, it gradually became mysterious.
There was something strange in the character of Hawkins. So firm, so
sturdily honest and just, as he appeared at first; all at once to become
a murderer! His first behaviour under the prosecution, how accurately
was it calculated to prepossess one in his favour! To be sure, if he
were guilty, it was unpardonable in him to permit a man of so much
dignity and worth as Mr. Falkland to suffer under the imputation of his
crime! And yet I could not help bitterly compassionating the honest
fellow, brought to the gallows, as he was, strictly speaking, by the
machinations of that devil incarnate, Mr. Tyrrel. His son, too, that son
for whom he voluntarily sacrificed his all, to die with him at the same
tree; surely never was a story more affecting!

Was it possible, after all, that Mr. Falkland should be the murderer?
The reader will scarcely believe, that the idea suggested itself to my
mind that I would ask him. It was but a passing thought; but it serves
to mark the simplicity of my character. Then I recollected the virtues
of my master, almost too sublime for human nature; I thought of his
sufferings so unexampled, so unmerited; and chid myself for the
suspicion. The dying confession of Hawkins recurred to my mind; and I
felt that there was no longer a possibility of doubting. And yet what
was the meaning of all Mr. Falkland's agonies and terrors? In fine, the
idea having once occurred to my mind, it was fixed there for ever. My
thoughts fluctuated from conjecture to conjecture, but this was the
centre about which they revolved. I determined to place myself as a
watch upon my patron.

The instant I had chosen this employment for myself, I found a strange
sort of pleasure in it. To do what is forbidden always has its charms,
because we have an indistinct apprehension of something arbitrary and
tyrannical in the prohibition. To be a spy upon Mr. Falkland! That there
was danger in the employment, served to give an alluring pungency to the
choice. I remembered the stern reprimand I had received, and his
terrible looks; and the recollection gave a kind of tingling sensation,
not altogether unallied to enjoyment. The further I advanced, the more
the sensation was irresistible. I seemed to myself perpetually upon the
brink of being countermined, and perpetually roused to guard my designs.
The more impenetrable Mr. Falkland was determined to be, the more
uncontrollable was my curiosity. Through the whole, my alarm and
apprehension of personal danger had a large mixture of frankness and
simplicity, conscious of meaning no ill, that made me continually ready
to say every thing that was upon my mind, and would not suffer me to
believe that, when things were brought to the test, any one could be
seriously angry with me.

These reflections led gradually to a new state of my mind. When I had
first removed into Mr. Falkland's family, the novelty of the scene
rendered me cautious and reserved. The distant and solemn manners of my
master seemed to have annihilated my constitutional gaiety. But the
novelty by degrees wore off, and my constraint in the same degree
diminished. The story I had now heard, and the curiosity it excited,
restored to me activity, eagerness, and courage. I had always had a
propensity to communicate my thoughts; my age was, of course, inclined
to talkativeness; and I ventured occasionally in a sort of hesitating
way, as if questioning whether such a conduct might be allowed, to
express my sentiments as they arose, in the presence of Mr. Falkland.

The first time I did so, he looked at me with an air of surprise, made
me no answer, and presently took occasion to leave me. The experiment
was soon after repeated. My master seemed half inclined to encourage me,
and yet doubtful whether he might venture.

He had long been a stranger to pleasure of every sort, and my artless
and untaught remarks appeared to promise him some amusement. Could an
amusement of this sort be dangerous?

In this uncertainty he could not probably find it in his heart to treat
with severity my innocent effusions. I needed but little encouragement;
for the perturbation of my mind stood in want of this relief. My
simplicity, arising from my being a total stranger to the intercourse of
the world, was accompanied with a mind in some degree cultivated with
reading, and perhaps not altogether destitute of observation and talent.
My remarks were therefore perpetually unexpected, at one time implying
extreme ignorance, and at another some portion of acuteness, but at all
times having an air of innocence, frankness, and courage. There was
still an apparent want of design in the manner, even after I was excited
accurately to compare my observations, and study the inferences to which
they led; for the effect of old habit was more visible than that of a
recently conceived purpose which was yet scarcely mature.

Mr. Falkland's situation was like that of a fish that plays with the
bait employed to entrap him. By my manner he was in a certain degree
encouraged to lay aside his usual reserve, and relax his stateliness;
till some abrupt observation or interrogatory stung him into
recollection, and brought back his alarm. Still it was evident that he
bore about him a secret wound. Whenever the cause of his sorrows was
touched, though in a manner the most indirect and remote, his
countenance altered, his distemper returned, and it was with difficulty
that he could suppress his emotions, sometimes conquering himself with
painful effort, and sometimes bursting into a sort of paroxysm of
insanity, and hastening to bury himself in solitude.

These appearances I too frequently interpreted into grounds of
suspicion, though I might with equal probability and more liberality
have ascribed them to the cruel mortifications he had encountered in the
objects of his darling ambition. Mr. Collins had strongly urged me to
secrecy; and Mr. Falkland, whenever my gesture or his consciousness
impressed him with the idea of my knowing more than I expressed, looked
at me with wistful earnestness, as questioning what was the degree of
information I possessed, and how it was obtained. But again at our next
interview the simple vivacity of my manner restored his tranquillity,
obliterated the emotion of which I had been the cause, and placed
things afresh in their former situation.

The longer this humble familiarity on my part had continued, the more
effort it would require to suppress it; and Mr. Falkland was neither
willing to mortify me by a severe prohibition of speech, nor even
perhaps to make me of so much consequence, as that prohibition might
seem to imply. Though I was curious, it must not be supposed that I had
the object of my enquiry for ever in my mind, or that my questions and
innuendoes were perpetually regulated with the cunning of a grey-headed
inquisitor. The secret wound of Mr. Falkland's mind was much more
uniformly present to his recollection than to mine; and a thousand times
he applied the remarks that occurred in conversation; when I had not the
remotest idea of such an application, till some singularity in his
manner brought it back to my thoughts. The consciousness of this morbid
sensibility, and the imagination that its influence might perhaps
constitute the whole of the case, served probably to spur Mr. Falkland
again to the charge, and connect a sentiment of shame, with every
project that suggested itself for interrupting the freedom of our
intercourse.

I will give a specimen of the conversations to which I allude; and, as
it shall be selected from those which began upon topics the most general
and remote, the reader will easily imagine the disturbance that was
almost daily endured by a mind so tremblingly alive as that of my
patron.

"Pray, sir," said I, one day as I was assisting Mr. Falkland in
arranging some papers, previously to their being transcribed into his
collection, "how came Alexander of Macedon to be surnamed the Great?"

"How came it? Did you never read his history?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, Williams, and could you find no reasons there?"

"Why, I do not know, sir. I could find reasons why he should be so
famous; but every man that is talked of is not admired. Judges differ
about the merits of Alexander. Doctor Prideaux says in his Connection,
that he deserves only to be called the Great Cut-throat; and the author
of Tom Jones has written a volume, to prove that he and all other
conquerors ought to be classed with Jonathan Wild."

Mr. Falkland reddened at these citations.

"Accursed blasphemy! Did these authors think that, by the coarseness of
their ribaldry, they could destroy his well-earned fame? Are learning,
sensibility, and taste, no securities to exempt their possessor from
this vulgar abuse? Did you ever read, Williams, of a man more gallant,
generous, and free? Was ever mortal so completely the reverse of every
thing engrossing and selfish? He formed to himself a sublime image of
excellence, and his only ambition was to realise it in his own story.
Remember his giving away every thing when he set out upon his grand
expedition, professedly reserving for himself nothing but hope.
Recollect his heroic confidence in Philip the physician, and his entire
and unalterable friendship for Ephestion. He treated the captive family
of Darius with the most cordial urbanity, and the venerable Sysigambis
with all the tenderness and attention of a son to his mother. Never take
the judgment, Williams, upon such a subject, of a clerical pedant or a
Westminster justice. Examine for yourself, and you will find in
Alexander a model of honour, generosity, and disinterestedness,--a man
who, for the cultivated liberality of his mind, and the unparalleled
grandeur of his projects, must stand alone the spectacle and admiration
of all ages of the world."

"Ah, sir! it is a fine thing for us to sit here and compose his
panegyric. But shall I forget what a vast expense was bestowed in
erecting the monument of his fame? Was not he the common disturber of
mankind? Did not he over-run nations that would never have heard of him
but for his devastations? How many hundred thousands of lives did he
sacrifice in his career? What must I think of his cruelties; a whole
tribe massacred for a crime committed by their ancestors one hundred and
fifty years before; fifty thousand sold into slavery; two thousand
crucified for their gallant defence of their country? Man is surely a
strange sort of creature, who never praises any one more heartily than
him who has spread destruction and ruin over the face of nations!"

"The way of thinking you express, Williams, is natural enough, and I
cannot blame you for it. But let me hope that you will become more
liberal. The death of a hundred thousand men is at first sight very
shocking; but what in reality are a hundred thousand such men, more than
a hundred thousand sheep? It is mind, Williams, the generation of
knowledge and virtue, that we ought to love. This was the project of
Alexander; he set out in a great undertaking to civilise mankind; he
delivered the vast continent of Asia from the stupidity and degradation
of the Persian monarchy: and, though he was cut off in the midst of his
career, we may easily perceive the vast effects of his project. Grecian
literature and cultivation, the Seleucidae, the Antiochuses, and the
Ptolemies followed, in nations which before had been sunk to the
condition of brutes. Alexander was the builder, as notoriously as the
destroyer, of cities."

"And yet, sir, I am afraid that the pike and the battle-axe are not the
right instruments for making men wise. Suppose it were admitted that
the lives of men were to be sacrificed without remorse if a paramount
good were to result, it seems to me as if murder and massacre were but a
very left-handed way of producing civilisation and love. But pray, do
not you think this great hero was a sort of a madman? What now will you
say to his firing the palace of Persepolis, his weeping for other worlds
to conquer, and his marching his whole army over the burning sands of
Libya, merely to visit a temple, and persuade mankind that he was the
son of Jupiter Ammon?"

"Alexander, my boy, has been much misunderstood. Mankind have revenged
themselves upon him by misrepresentation, for having so far eclipsed the
rest of his species. It was necessary to the realising his project, that
he should pass for a god. It was the only way by which he could get a
firm hold upon the veneration of the stupid and bigoted Persians. It was
this, and not a mad vanity, that was the source of his proceeding. And
how much had he to struggle with in this respect, in the unapprehending
obstinacy of some of his Macedonians?"

"Why then, sir, at last Alexander did but employ means that all
politicians profess to use, as well as he. He dragooned men into wisdom,
and cheated them into the pursuit of their own happiness. But what is
worse, sir, this Alexander, in the paroxysm of his headlong rage, spared
neither friend nor foe. You will not pretend to justify the excesses of
his ungovernable passion. It is impossible, sure, that a word can be
said for a man whom a momentary provocation can hurry into the
commission of murders--"

The instant I had uttered these words, I felt what it was that I had
done. There was a magnetical sympathy between me and my patron, so that
their effect was not sooner produced upon him, than my own mind
reproached me with the inhumanity of the allusion. Our confusion was
mutual. The blood forsook at once the transparent complexion of Mr.
Falkland, and then rushed back again with rapidity and fierceness. I
dared not utter a word, lest I should commit a new error, worse than
that into which I had just fallen. After a short, but severe, struggle
to continue the conversation, Mr. Falkland began with trepidation, but
afterwards became calmer:--

"You are not candid--Alexander--You must learn more clemency--Alexander,
I say, does not deserve this rigour. Do you remember his tears, his
remorse, his determined abstinence from food, which he could scarcely be
persuaded to relinquish? Did not that prove acute feeling and a rooted
principle of equity?--Well, well, Alexander was a true and judicious
lover of mankind, and his real merits have been little comprehended."

I know not how to make the state of my mind at that moment accurately
understood. When one idea has got possession of the soul, it is scarcely
possible to keep it from finding its way to the lips. Error, once
committed, has a fascinating power, like that ascribed to the eyes of
the rattlesnake, to draw us into a second error. It deprives us of that
proud confidence in our own strength, to which we are indebted for so
much of our virtue. Curiosity is a restless propensity, and often does
but hurry us forward the more irresistibly, the greater is the danger
that attends its indulgence.

"Clitus," said I, "was a man of very coarse and provoking manners, was
he not?"

Mr. Falkland felt the full force of this appeal. He gave me a
penetrating look, as if he would see my very soul. His eyes were then in
an instant withdrawn. I could perceive him seized with a convulsive
shuddering which, though strongly counteracted, and therefore scarcely
visible, had I know not what of terrible in it. He left his employment,
strode about the room in anger, his visage gradually assumed an
expression as of supernatural barbarity, he quitted the apartment
abruptly, and flung the door with a violence that seemed to shake the
house.

"Is this," said I, "the fruit of conscious guilt, or of the disgust that
a man of honour conceives at guilt undeservedly imputed?"




CHAPTER II.


The reader will feel how rapidly I was advancing to the brink of the
precipice. I had a confused apprehension of what I was doing, but I
could not stop myself. "Is it possible," said I, "that Mr. Falkland, who
is thus overwhelmed with a sense of the unmerited dishonour that has
been fastened upon him in the face of the world, will long endure the
presence of a raw and unfriended youth, who is perpetually bringing back
that dishonour to his recollection, and who seems himself the most
forward to entertain the accusation?"

I felt indeed that Mr. Falkland would not hastily incline to dismiss me,
for the same reason that restrained him from many other actions, which
might seem to savour of a too tender and ambiguous sensibility. But this
reflection was little adapted to comfort me. That he should cherish in
his heart a growing hatred against me, and that he should think himself
obliged to retain me a continual thorn in his side, was an idea by no
means of favourable augury to my future peace.

It was some time after this that, in clearing out a case of drawers, I
found a paper that, by some accident, had slipped behind one of the
drawers, and been overlooked. At another time perhaps my curiosity might
have given way to the laws of decorum, and I should have restored it
unopened to my master, its owner. But my eagerness for information had
been too much stimulated by the preceding incidents, to allow me at
present to neglect any occasion of obtaining it. The paper proved to be
a letter written by the elder Hawkins, and from its contents seemed to
have been penned when he had first been upon the point of absconding
from the persecutions of Mr. Tyrrel. It was as follows:--

"Honourable Sir,

"I have waited some time in daily hope of your honour's return into
these parts. Old Warnes and his dame, who are left to take care of your
house, tell me they cannot say when that will be, nor justly in what
part of England you are at present. For my share, misfortune comes so
thick upon me, that I must determine upon something (that is for
certain), and out of hand. Our squire, who I must own at first used me
kindly enough, though I am afraid that was partly out of spite to squire
Underwood, has since determined to be the ruin of me. Sir, I have been
no craven; I fought it up stoutly; for after all, you know, God bless
your honour! it is but a man to a man; but he has been too much for me.

"Perhaps if I were to ride over to the market-town and enquire of
Munsle, your lawyer, he could tell me how to direct to you. But having
hoped and waited o' this fashion, and all in vain, has put me upon other
thoughts. I was in no hurry, sir, to apply to you; for I do not love to
be a trouble to any body. I kept that for my last stake. Well, sir, and
now that has failed me like, I am ashamed, as it were, to have thought
of it. Have not I, thinks I, arms and legs as well as other people? I am
driven out of house and home. Well, and what then? Sure I arn't a
cabbage, that if you pull it out of the ground it must die. I am
pennyless. True; and how many hundreds are there that live from hand to
mouth all the days of their life? (Begging your honour's pardon) thinks
I, if we little folks had but the wit to do for ourselves, the great
folks would not be such maggotty changelings as they are. They would
begin to look about them.

"But there is another thing that has swayed with me more than all the
rest. I do not know how to tell you, sir,--My poor boy, my Leonard, the
pride of my life, has been three weeks in the county jail. It is true
indeed, sir. Squire Tyrrel put him there. Now, sir, every time that I
lay my head upon my pillow under my own little roof, my heart smites me
with the situation of my Leonard. I do not mean so much for the
hardship; I do not so much matter that. I do not expect him to go
through the world upon velvet! I am not such a fool. But who can tell
what may hap in a jail! I have been three times to see him; and there is
one man in the same quarter of the prison that looks so wicked! I do not
much fancy the looks of the rest. To be sure, Leonard is as good a lad
as ever lived. I think he will not give his mind to such. But come what
will, I am determined he shall not stay among them twelve hours longer.
I am an obstinate old fool perhaps; but I have taken it into my head,
and I will do it. Do not ask me what. But, if I were to write to your
honour, and wait for your answer, it might take a week or ten days more.
I must not think of it!

"Squire Tyrrel is very headstrong, and you, your honour, might be a
little hottish, or so. No, I would not have any body quarrel for me.
There has been mischief enough done already; and I will get myself out
of the way. So I write this, your honour, merely to unload my mind. I
feel myself equally as much bound to respect and love you, as if you had
done every thing for me, that I believe you would have done if things
had chanced differently. It is most likely you will never hear of me any
more. If it should be so, set your worthy heart at rest. I know myself
too well, ever to be tempted to do any thing that is really bad. I have
now my fortune to seek in the world. I have been used ill enough, God
knows. But I bear no malice; my heart is at peace with all mankind; and
I forgive every body. It is like enough that poor Leonard and I may have
hardship enough to undergo, among strangers, and being obliged to hide
ourselves like housebreakers or highwaymen. But I defy all the malice of
fortune to make us do an ill thing. That consolation we will always keep
against all the crosses of a heart-breaking world.

          "God bless you!
               So prays,
  Your honour's humble servant to command,
                    BENJAMIN HAWKINS."

I read this letter with considerable attention, and it occasioned me
many reflections. To my way of thinking it contained a very interesting
picture of a blunt, downright, honest mind. "It is a melancholy
consideration," said I to myself; "but such is man! To have judged from
appearances one would have said, this is a fellow to have taken
fortune's buffets and rewards with an incorruptible mind. And yet see
where it all ends! This man was capable of afterwards becoming a
murderer, and finished his life at the gallows. O poverty! thou art
indeed omnipotent! Thou grindest us into desperation; thou confoundest
all our boasted and most deep-rooted principles; thou fillest us to the
very brim with malice and revenge, and renderest us capable of acts of
unknown horror! May I never be visited by thee in the fulness of thy
power!"

Having satisfied my curiosity with respect to this paper, I took care to
dispose of it in such a manner as that it should be found by Mr.
Falkland; at the same time that, in obedience to the principle which at
present governed me with absolute dominion, I was willing that the way
in which it offered itself to his attention should suggest to him the
idea that it had possibly passed through my hands. The next morning I
saw him, and I exerted myself to lead the conversation, which by this
time I well knew how to introduce, by insensible degrees to the point I
desired. After several previous questions, remarks, and rejoinders, I
continued:--

"Well, sir, after all, I cannot help feeling very uncomfortably as to my
ideas of human nature, when I find that there is no dependence to be
placed upon its perseverance, and that, at least among the illiterate,
the most promising appearances may end in the foulest disgrace."

"You think, then, that literature and a cultivated mind are the only
assurance for the constancy of our principles!"

"Humph!--why do you suppose, sir, that learning and ingenuity do not
often serve people rather to hide their crimes than to restrain them
from committing them? History tells us strange things in that respect."

"Williams," said Mr. Falkland, a little disturbed, "you are extremely
given to censure and severity."

"I hope not. I am sure I am most fond of looking on the other side of
the picture, and considering how many men have been aspersed, and even
at some time or other almost torn to pieces by their fellow-creatures,
whom, when properly understood, we find worthy of our reverence and
love."

"Indeed," replied Mr. Falkland, with a sigh, "when I consider these
things I do not wonder at the dying exclamation of Brutus, 'O Virtue, I
sought thee as a substance, but I find thee an empty name!' I am too
much inclined to be of his opinion."

"Why, to be sure, sir, innocence and guilt are too much confounded in
human life. I remember an affecting story of a poor man in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth, who would have infallibly been hanged for murder upon
the strength of circumstantial evidence, if the person really concerned
had not been himself upon the jury and prevented it."

In saying this I touched the spring that wakened madness in his mind. He
came up to me with a ferocious countenance, as if determined to force me
into a confession of my thoughts. A sudden pang however seemed to change
his design! he drew back with trepidation, and exclaimed, "Detested be
the universe, and the laws that govern it! Honour, justice, virtue, are
all the juggle of knaves! If it were in my power I would instantly crush
the whole system into nothing!"

I replied; "Oh, sir! things are not so bad as you imagine. The world was
made for men of sense to do what they will with. Its affairs cannot be
better than in the direction of the genuine heroes; and as in the end
they will be found the truest friends of the whole, so the multitude
have nothing to do but to look on, be fashioned, and admire."

Mr. Falkland made a powerful effort to recover his tranquillity.
"Williams," said he, "you instruct me well. You have a right notion of
things, and I have great hopes of you. I will be more of a man; I will
forget the past, and do better for the time to come. The future, the
future is always our own."

"I am sorry, sir, that I have given you pain. I am afraid to say all
that I think. But it is my opinion that mistakes will ultimately be
cleared up, justice done, and the true state of things come to light, in
spite of the false colours that may for a time obscure it."

The idea I suggested did not give Mr. Falkland the proper degree of
delight. He suffered a temporary relapse. "Justice!"--he muttered. "I do
not know what is justice. My case is not within the reach of common
remedies; perhaps of none. I only know that I am miserable. I began life
with the best intentions and the most fervid philanthropy; and here I
am--miserable--miserable beyond expression or endurance."

Having said this, he seemed suddenly to recollect himself, and
re-assumed his accustomed dignity and command. "How came this
conversation?" cried he. "Who gave you a right to be my confidant? Base,
artful wretch that you are! learn to be more respectful! Are my passions
to be wound and unwound by an insolent domestic? Do you think I will be
an instrument to be played on at your pleasure, till you have extorted
all the treasures of my soul? Begone, and fear lest you be made to pay
for the temerity you have already committed!"

There was an energy and determination in the gestures with which these
words were accompanied, that did not admit of their being disputed. My
mouth was closed; I felt as if deprived of all share of activity, and
was only able silently and passively to quit the apartment.




CHAPTER III.


Two days subsequent to this conversation, Mr. Falkland ordered me to be
called to him. [I shall continue to speak in my narrative of the silent,
as well as the articulate part of the intercourse between us. His
countenance was habitually animated and expressive, much beyond that of
any other man I have seen. The curiosity which, as I have said,
constituted my ruling passion, stimulated me to make it my perpetual
study. It will also most probably happen, while I am thus employed in
collecting the scattered incidents of my history, that I shall upon some
occasions annex to appearances an explanation which I was far from
possessing at the time, and was only suggested to me through the medium
of subsequent events.]

When I entered the apartment, I remarked in Mr. Falkland's countenance
an unwonted composure. This composure however did not seem to result
from internal ease, but from an effort which, while he prepared himself
for an interesting scene, was exerted to prevent his presence of mind,
and power of voluntary action, from suffering any diminution.

"Williams," said he, "I am determined, whatever it may cost me, to have
an explanation with you. You are a rash and inconsiderate boy, and have
given me much disturbance. You ought to have known that, though I allow
you to talk with me upon indifferent subjects, it is very improper in
you to lead the conversation to any thing that relates to my personal
concerns. You have said many things lately in a very mysterious way, and
appear to know something more than I am aware of. I am equally at a loss
to guess how you came by your knowledge, as of what it consists. But I
think I perceive too much inclination on your part to trifle with my
peace of mind. That ought not to be, nor have I deserved any such
treatment from you. But, be that as it will, the guesses in which you
oblige me to employ myself are too painful. It is a sort of sporting
with my feelings, which, as a man of resolution, I am determined to
bring to an end. I expect you therefore to lay aside all mystery and
equivocation, and inform me explicitly what it is upon which your
allusions are built. What is it you know? What is it you want? I have
been too much exposed already to unparalleled mortification and
hardship, and my wounds will not bear this perpetual tampering."

"I feel, sir," answered I, "how wrong I have been, and am ashamed that
such a one as I should have given you all this trouble and displeasure.
I felt it at the time; but I have been hurried along, I do not know how.
I have always tried to stop myself, but the demon that possessed me was
too strong for me. I know nothing, sir, but what Mr. Collins told me. He
told me the story of Mr. Tyrrel and Miss Melville and Hawkins. I am
sure, sir, he said nothing but what was to your honour, and proved you
to be more an angel than a man."

"Well, sir: I found a letter written by that Hawkins the other day; did
not that letter fall into your hands? Did not you read it?"

"For God's sake, sir, turn me out of your house. Punish me in some way
or other, that I may forgive myself. I am a foolish, wicked, despicable
wretch. I confess, sir, I did read the letter."

"And how dared you read it? It was indeed very wrong of you. But we will
talk of that by and by. Well, and what did you say to the letter? You
know it seems, that Hawkins was hanged."

"I say, sir? why it went to my heart to read it. I say, as I said the
day before yesterday, that when I see a man of so much principle
afterwards deliberately proceeding to the very worst of crimes, I can
scarcely bear to think of it."

"That is what you say? It seems too you know--accursed
remembrance!--that I was accused of this crime?"

I was silent.

"Well, sir. You know too, perhaps, that from the hour the crime was
committed--yes, sir, that was the date [and as he said this, there was
somewhat frightful, I had almost said diabolical, in his countenance]--I
have not had an hour's peace; I became changed from the happiest to the
most miserable thing that lives; sleep has fled from my eyes; joy has
been a stranger to my thoughts; and annihilation I should prefer a
thousand times to the being that I am. As soon as I was capable of a
choice, I chose honour and the esteem of mankind as a good I preferred
to all others. You know, it seems, in how many ways my ambition has been
disappointed,--I do not thank Collins for having been the historian of
my disgrace,--would to God that night could be blotted from the memory
of man!--But the scene of that night, instead of perishing, has been a
source of ever new calamity to me, which must flow for ever! Am I then,
thus miserable and ruined, a proper subject upon which for you to
exercise your ingenuity, and improve your power of tormenting? Was it
not enough that I was publicly dishonoured? that I was deprived, by the
pestilential influence of some demon, of the opportunity of avenging my
dishonour? No: in addition to this, I have been charged with having in
this critical moment intercepted my own vengeance by the foulest of
crimes. That trial is past. Misery itself has nothing worse in store for
me, except what you have inflicted: the seeming to doubt of my
innocence, which, after the fullest and most solemn examination, has
been completely established. You have forced me to this explanation. You
have extorted from me a confidence which I had no inclination to make.
But it is a part of the misery of my situation, that I am at the mercy
of every creature, however little, who feels himself inclined to sport
with my distress. Be content. You have brought me low enough."

"Oh, sir, I am not content; I cannot be content! I cannot bear to think
what I have done. I shall never again be able to look in the face of the
best of masters and the best of men. I beg of you, sir, to turn me out
of your service. Let me go and hide myself where I may never see you
more."

Mr. Falkland's countenance had indicated great severity through the
whole of this conversation; but now it became more harsh and tempestuous
than ever. "How now, rascal!" cried he. "You want to leave me, do you?
Who told you that I wished to part with you? But you cannot bear to live
with such a miserable wretch as I am! You are not disposed to put up
with the caprices of a man so dissatisfied and unjust!"

"Oh, sir! do not talk to me thus! Do with me any thing you will. Kill me
if you please."

"Kill you!" [Volumes could not describe the emotions with which this
echo of my words was given and received.]

"Sir, I could die to serve you! I love you more than I can express. I
worship you as a being of a superior nature. I am foolish, raw,
inexperienced,--worse than any of these;--but never did a thought of
disloyalty to your service enter into my heart."

Here our conversation ended; and the impression it made upon my youthful
mind it is impossible to describe. I thought with astonishment, even
with rapture, of the attention and kindness towards me I discovered in
Mr. Falkland, through all the roughness of his manner. I could never
enough wonder at finding myself, humble as I was by my birth, obscure as
I had hitherto been, thus suddenly become of so much importance to the
happiness of one of the most enlightened and accomplished men in
England. But this consciousness attached me to my patron more eagerly
than ever, and made me swear a thousand times, as I meditated upon my
situation, that I would never prove unworthy of so generous a protector.




CHAPTER IV.


Is it not unaccountable that, in the midst of all my increased
veneration for my patron, the first tumult of my emotion was scarcely
subsided, before the old question that had excited my conjectures
recurred to my mind, Was he the murderer? It was a kind of fatal
impulse, that seemed destined to hurry me to my destruction. I did not
wonder at the disturbance that was given to Mr. Falkland by any
allusion, however distant, to this fatal affair. That was as completely
accounted for from the consideration of his excessive sensibility in
matters of honour, as it would have been upon the supposition of the
most atrocious guilt. Knowing, as he did, that such a charge had once
been connected with his name, he would of course be perpetually uneasy,
and suspect some latent insinuation at every possible opportunity. He
would doubt and fear, lest every man with whom he conversed harboured
the foulest suspicion against him. In my case he found that I was in
possession of some information, more than he was aware of, without its
being possible for him to decide to what it amounted, whether I had
heard a just or unjust, a candid or calumniatory tale. He had also
reason to suppose that I gave entertainment to thoughts derogatory to
his honour, and that I did not form that favourable judgment, which the
exquisite refinement of his ruling passion made indispensable to his
peace. All these considerations would of course maintain in him a state
of perpetual uneasiness. But, though I could find nothing that I could
consider as justifying me in persisting in the shadow of a doubt, yet,
as I have said, the uncertainty and restlessness of my contemplations
would by no means depart from me.

The fluctuating state of my mind produced a contention of opposite
principles, that by turns usurped dominion over my conduct. Sometimes I
was influenced by the most complete veneration for my master; I placed
an unreserved confidence in his integrity and his virtue, and implicitly
surrendered my understanding for him to set it to what point he pleased.
At other times the confidence, which had before flowed with the most
plenteous tide, began to ebb; I was, as I had already been, watchful,
inquisitive, suspicious, full of a thousand conjectures as to the
meaning of the most indifferent actions. Mr. Falkland, who was most
painfully alive to every thing that related to his honour, saw these
variations, and betrayed his consciousness of them now in one manner,
and now in another, frequently before I was myself aware, sometimes
almost before they existed. The situation of both was distressing; we
were each of us a plague to the other; and I often wondered, that the
forbearance and benignity of my master was not at length exhausted, and
that he did not determine to thrust from him for ever so incessant an
observer. There was indeed one eminent difference between his share in
the transaction and mine. I had some consolation in the midst of my
restlessness. Curiosity is a principle that carries its pleasures, as
well as its pains, along with it. The mind is urged by a perpetual
stimulus; it seems as if it were continually approaching to the end of
its race; and as the insatiable desire of satisfaction is its principle
of conduct, so it promises itself in that satisfaction an unknown
gratification, which seems as if it were capable of fully compensating
any injuries that may be suffered in the career. But to Mr. Falkland
there was no consolation. What he endured in the intercourse between us
appeared to be gratuitous evil. He had only to wish that there was no
such person as myself in the world, and to curse the hour when his
humanity led him to rescue me from my obscurity, and place me in his
service.

A consequence produced upon me by the extraordinary nature of my
situation it is necessary to mention. The constant state of vigilance
and suspicion in which my mind was retained, worked a very rapid change
in my character. It seemed to have all the effect that might have been
expected from years of observation and experience. The strictness with
which I endeavoured to remark what passed in the mind of one man, and
the variety of conjectures into which I was led, appeared, as it were,
to render me a competent adept in the different modes in which the
human intellect displays its secret workings. I no longer said to
myself, as I had done in the beginning, "I will ask Mr. Falkland whether
he were the murderer." On the contrary, after having carefully examined
the different kinds of evidence of which the subject was susceptible,
and recollecting all that had already passed upon the subject, it was
not without considerable pain, that I felt myself unable to discover any
way in which I could be perfectly and unalterably satisfied of my
patron's innocence. As to his guilt, I could scarcely bring myself to
doubt that in some way or other, sooner or later, I should arrive at the
knowledge of that, if it really existed. But I could not endure to
think, almost for a moment, of that side of the alternative as true; and
with all my ungovernable suspicion arising from the mysteriousness of
the circumstances, and all the delight which a young and unfledged mind
receives from ideas that give scope to all that imagination can picture
of terrible or sublime, I could not yet bring myself to consider Mr.
Falkland's guilt as a supposition attended with the remotest
probability.

I hope the reader will forgive me for dwelling thus long on preliminary
circumstances. I shall come soon enough to the story of my own misery. I
have already said, that one of the motives which induced me to the
penning of this narrative, was to console myself in my insupportable
distress. I derive a melancholy pleasure from dwelling upon the
circumstances which imperceptibly paved the way to my ruin. While I
recollect or describe past scenes, which occurred in a more favourable
period of my life, my attention is called off for a short interval, from
the hopeless misfortune in which I am at present involved. The man must
indeed possess an uncommon portion of hardness of heart, who can envy
me so slight a relief.--To proceed.

For some time after the explanation which had thus taken place between
me and Mr. Falkland, his melancholy, instead of being in the slightest
degree diminished by the lenient hand of time, went on perpetually to
increase. His fits of insanity--for such I must denominate them for want
of a distinct appellation, though it is possible they might not fall
under the definition that either the faculty or the court of chancery
appropriate to the term--became stronger and more durable than ever. It
was no longer practicable wholly to conceal them from the family, and
even from the neighbourhood. He would sometimes, without any previous
notice, absent himself from his house for two or three days,
unaccompanied by servant or attendant. This was the more extraordinary,
as it was well known that he paid no visits, nor kept up any sort of
intercourse with the gentlemen of the vicinity. But it was impossible
that a man of Mr. Falkland's distinction and fortune should long
continue in such a practice, without its being discovered what was
become of him; though a considerable part of our county was among the
wildest and most desolate districts that are to be found in South
Britain. Mr. Falkland was sometimes seen climbing among the rocks,
reclining motionless for hours together upon the edge of a precipice, or
lulled into a kind of nameless lethargy of despair by the dashing of the
torrents. He would remain for whole nights together under the naked cope
of heaven, inattentive to the consideration either of place or time;
insensible to the variations of the weather, or rather seeming to be
delighted with that uproar of the elements, which partially called off
his attention from the discord and dejection that occupied his own mind.

At first, when we received intelligence at any time of the place to
which Mr. Falkland had withdrawn himself, some person of his household,
Mr. Collins or myself, but most generally myself, as I was always at
home, and always, in the received sense of the word, at leisure, went to
him to persuade him to return. But, after a few experiments, we thought
it advisable to desist, and leave him to prolong his absence, or to
terminate it, as might happen to suit his own inclination. Mr. Collins,
whose grey hairs and long services seemed to give him a sort of right to
be importunate, sometimes succeeded; though even in that case there was
nothing that could sit more uneasily upon Mr. Falkland than this
insinuation as if he wanted a guardian to take care of him, or as if he
were in, or in danger of falling into, a state in which he would be
incapable of deliberately controlling his own words and actions. At one
time he would suddenly yield to his humble, venerable friend, murmuring
grievously at the constraint that was put upon him, but without spirit
enough even to complain of it with energy. At another time, even though
complying, he would suddenly burst out in a paroxysm of resentment. Upon
these occasions there was something inconceivably, savagely terrible in
his anger, that gave to the person against whom it was directed the most
humiliating and insupportable sensations. Me he always treated, at these
times, with fierceness, and drove me from him with a vehemence lofty,
emphatical, and sustained, beyond any thing of which I should have
thought human nature to be capable. These sallies seemed always to
constitute a sort of crisis in his indisposition; and, whenever he was
induced to such a premature return, he would fall immediately after into
a state of the most melancholy inactivity, in which he usually continued
for two or three days. It was by an obstinate fatality that, whenever I
saw Mr. Falkland in these deplorable situations, and particularly when I
lighted upon him after having sought him among the rocks and precipices,
pale, emaciated, solitary, and haggard, the suggestion would continually
recur to me, in spite of inclination, in spite of persuasion, and in
spite of evidence, Surely this man is a murderer!




CHAPTER V.


It was in one of the lucid intervals, as I may term them, that occurred
during this period, that a peasant was brought before him, in his
character of a justice of peace, upon an accusation of having murdered
his fellow. As Mr. Falkland had by this time acquired the repute of a
melancholy valetudinarian, it is probable he would not have been called
upon to act in his official character upon the present occasion, had it
not been that two or three of the neighbouring justices were all of them
from home at once, so that he was the only one to be found in a circuit
of many miles. The reader however must not imagine, though I have
employed the word insanity in describing Mr. Falkland's symptoms, that
he was by any means reckoned for a madman by the generality of those who
had occasion to observe him. It is true that his behaviour, at certain
times, was singular and unaccountable; but then, at other times, there
was in it so much dignity, regularity, and economy; he knew so well how
to command and make himself respected; his actions and carriage were so
condescending, considerate, and benevolent, that, far from having
forfeited the esteem of the unfortunate or the many, they were loud and
earnest in his praises.

I was present at the examination of this peasant. The moment I heard of
the errand which had brought this rabble of visitors, a sudden thought
struck me. I conceived the possibility of rendering the incident
subordinate to the great enquiry which drank up all the currents of my
soul. I said, this man is arraigned of murder, and murder is the
master-key that wakes distemper in the mind of Mr. Falkland. I will
watch him without remission. I will trace all the mazes of his thought.
Surely at such a time his secret anguish must betray itself. Surely, if
it be not my own fault, I shall now be able to discover the state of his
plea before the tribunal of unerring justice.

I took my station in a manner most favourable to the object upon which
my mind was intent. I could perceive in Mr. Falkland's features, as he
entered, a strong reluctance to the business in which he was engaged;
but there was no possibility of retreating. His countenance was
embarrassed and anxious; he scarcely saw any body. The examination had
not proceeded far, before he chanced to turn his eye to the part of the
room where I was. It happened in this as in some preceding instances--we
exchanged a silent look, by which we told volumes to each other. Mr.
Falkland's complexion turned from red to pale, and from pale to red. I
perfectly understood his feelings, and would willingly have withdrawn
myself. But it was impossible; my passions were too deeply engaged; I
was rooted to the spot; though my own life, that of my master, or almost
of a whole nation had been at stake, I had no power to change my
position.

The first surprise however having subsided, Mr. Falkland assumed a look
of determined constancy, and even seemed to increase in self-possession
much beyond what could have been expected from his first entrance. This
he could probably have maintained, had it not been that the scene,
instead of being permanent, was in some sort perpetually changing. The
man who was brought before him was vehemently accused by the brother of
the deceased as having acted from the most rooted malice. He swore that
there had been an old grudge between the parties, and related several
instances of it. He affirmed that the murderer had sought the earliest
opportunity of wreaking his revenge; had struck the first blow; and,
though the contest was in appearance only a common boxing match, had
watched the occasion of giving a fatal stroke, which was followed by the
instant death of his antagonist.

While the accuser was giving in his evidence, the accused discovered
every token of the most poignant sensibility. At one time his features
were convulsed with anguish; tears unbidden trickled down his manly
cheeks; and at another he started with apparent astonishment at the
unfavourable turn that was given to the narrative, though without
betraying any impatience to interrupt. I never saw a man less ferocious
in his appearance. He was tall, well made, and comely. His countenance
was ingenuous and benevolent, without folly. By his side stood a young
woman, his sweetheart, extremely agreeable in her person, and her looks
testifying how deeply she interested herself in the fate of her lover.
The accidental spectators were divided, between indignation against the
enormity of the supposed criminal, and compassion for the poor girl that
accompanied him. They seemed to take little notice of the favourable
appearances visible in the person of the accused, till, in the sequel,
those appearances were more forcibly suggested to their attention. For
Mr. Falkland, he was at one moment engrossed by curiosity and
earnestness to investigate the tale, while at another he betrayed a sort
of revulsion of sentiment, which made the investigation too painful for
him to support.

When the accused was called upon for his defence, he readily owned the
misunderstanding that had existed, and that the deceased was the worst
enemy he had in the world. Indeed he was his only enemy, and he could
not tell the reason that had made him so. He had employed every effort
to overcome his animosity, but in vain. The deceased had upon all
occasions sought to mortify him, and do him an ill turn; but he had
resolved never to be engaged in a broil with him, and till this day he
had succeeded. If he had met with a misfortune with any other man,
people at least might have thought it accident; but now it would always
be believed that he had acted from secret malice and a bad heart.

The fact was, that he and his sweetheart had gone to a neighbouring
fair, where this man had met them. The man had often tried to affront
him; and his passiveness, interpreted into cowardice, had perhaps
encouraged the other to additional rudeness. Finding that he had endured
trivial insults to himself with an even temper, the deceased now thought
proper to turn his brutality upon the young woman that accompanied him.
He pursued them; he endeavoured in various manners to harass and vex
them; they had sought in vain to shake him off. The young woman was
considerably terrified. The accused expostulated with their persecutor,
and asked him how he could be so barbarous as to persist in frightening
a woman? He replied with an insulting tone, "Then the woman should find
some one able to protect her; people that encouraged and trusted to such
a thief as that, deserved no better!" The accused tried every expedient
he could invent; at length he could endure it no longer; he became
exasperated, and challenged the assailant. The challenge was accepted; a
ring was formed; he confided the care of his sweetheart to a bystander;
and unfortunately the first blow he struck proved fatal.

The accused added, that he did not care what became of him. He had been
anxious to go through the world in an inoffensive manner, and now he had
the guilt of blood upon him. He did not know but it would be kindness in
them to hang him out of the way; for his conscience would reproach him
as long as he lived, and the figure of the deceased, as he had lain
senseless and without motion at his feet, would perpetually haunt him.
The thought of this man, at one moment full of life and vigour, and the
next lifted a helpless corpse from the ground, and all owing to him, was
a thought too dreadful to be endured. He had loved the poor maiden, who
had been the innocent occasion of this, with all his heart; but from
this time he should never support the sight of her. The sight would
bring a tribe of fiends in its rear. One unlucky minute had poisoned all
his hopes, and made life a burden to him. Saying this, his countenance
fell, the muscles of his face trembled with agony, and he looked the
statue of despair.

This was the story of which Mr. Falkland was called upon to be the
auditor. Though the incidents were, for the most part, wide of those
which belonged to the adventures of the preceding volume, and there had
been much less policy and skill displayed on either part in this rustic
encounter, yet there were many points which, to a man who bore the
former strongly in his recollection, suggested a sufficient resemblance.
In each case it was a human brute persisting in a course of hostility to
a man of benevolent character, and suddenly and terribly cut off in the
midst of his career. These points perpetually smote upon the heart of
Mr. Falkland. He at one time started with astonishment, and at another
shifted his posture, like a man who is unable longer to endure the
sensations that press upon him. Then he new strung his nerves to
stubborn patience. I could see, while his muscles preserved an
inflexible steadiness, tears of anguish roll down his cheeks. He dared
not trust his eyes to glance towards the side of the room where I stood;
and this gave an air of embarrassment to his whole figure. But when the
accused came to speak of his feelings, to describe the depth of his
compunction for an involuntary fault, he could endure it no longer. He
suddenly rose, and with every mark of horror and despair rushed out of
the room.

This circumstance made no material difference in the affair of the
accused. The parties were detained about half an hour. Mr. Falkland had
already heard the material parts of the evidence in person. At the
expiration of that interval, he sent for Mr. Collins out of the room.
The story of the culprit was confirmed by many witnesses who had seen
the transaction. Word was brought that my master was indisposed; and, at
the same time, the accused was ordered to be discharged. The vengeance
of the brother however, as I afterwards found, did not rest here, and he
met with a magistrate, more scrupulous or more despotic, by whom the
culprit was committed for trial.

This affair was no sooner concluded, than I hastened into the garden,
and plunged into the deepest of its thickets. My mind was full, almost
to bursting. I no sooner conceived myself sufficiently removed from all
observation, than my thoughts forced their way spontaneously to my
tongue, and I exclaimed, in a fit of uncontrollable enthusiasm, "This is
the murderer; the Hawkinses were innocent! I am sure of it! I will
pledge my life for it! It is out! It is discovered! Guilty, upon my
soul!"

While I thus proceeded with hasty steps along the most secret paths of
the garden, and from time to time gave vent to the tumult of my thoughts
in involuntary exclamations, I felt as if my animal system had undergone
a total revolution. My blood boiled within me. I was conscious to a kind
of rapture for which I could not account. I was solemn, yet full of
rapid emotion, burning with indignation and energy. In the very tempest
and hurricane of the passions, I seemed to enjoy the most soul-ravishing
calm. I cannot better express the then state of my mind than by saying,
I was never so perfectly alive as at that moment.

This state of mental elevation continued for several hours, but at
length subsided, and gave place to more deliberate reflection. One of
the first questions that then occurred was, what shall I do with the
knowledge I have been so eager to acquire? I had no inclination to turn
informer. I felt what I had had no previous conception of, that it was
possible to love a murderer, and, as I then understood it, the worst of
murderers. I conceived it to be in the highest degree absurd and
iniquitous, to cut off a man qualified for the most essential and
extensive utility, merely out of retrospect to an act which, whatever
were its merits, could not be retrieved.

This thought led me to another, which had at first passed unnoticed. If
I had been disposed to turn informer, what had occurred amounted to no
evidence that was admissible in a court of justice. Well then, added I,
if it be such as would not be admitted at a criminal tribunal, am I sure
it is such as I ought to admit? There were twenty persons besides myself
present at the scene from which I pretend to derive such entire
conviction. Not one of them saw it in the light that I did. It either
appeared to them a casual and unimportant circumstance, or they thought
it sufficiently accounted for by Mr. Falkland's infirmity and
misfortunes. Did it really contain such an extent of arguments and
application, that nobody but I was discerning enough to see?

But all this reasoning produced no alteration in my way of thinking. For
this time I could not get it out of my mind for a moment: "Mr. Falkland
is the murderer! He is guilty! I see it! I feel it! I am sure of it!"
Thus was I hurried along by an uncontrollable destiny. The state of my
passions in their progressive career, the inquisitiveness and impatience
of my thoughts, appeared to make this determination unavoidable.

An incident occurred while I was in the garden, that seemed to make no
impression upon me at the time, but which I recollected when my thoughts
were got into somewhat of a slower motion. In the midst of one of my
paroxysms of exclamation, and when I thought myself most alone, the
shadow of a man as avoiding me passed transiently by me at a small
distance. Though I had scarcely caught a faint glimpse of his person,
there was something in the occurrence that persuaded me it was Mr.
Falkland. I shuddered at the possibility of his having overheard the
words of my soliloquy. But this idea, alarming as it was, had not power
immediately to suspend the career of my reflections. Subsequent
circumstances however brought back the apprehension to my mind. I had
scarcely a doubt of its reality, when dinner-time came, and Mr. Falkland
was not to be found. Supper and bed-time passed in the same manner. The
only conclusion made by his servants upon this circumstance was, that he
was gone upon one of his accustomed melancholy rambles.




CHAPTER VI.


The period at which my story is now arrived seemed as if it were the
very crisis of the fortune of Mr. Falkland. Incident followed upon
incident, in a kind of breathless succession. About nine o'clock the
next morning an alarm was given, that one of the chimneys of the house
was on fire. No accident could be apparently more trivial; but presently
it blazed with such fury, as to make it clear that some beam of the
house, which in the first building had been improperly placed, had been
reached by the flames. Some danger was apprehended for the whole
edifice. The confusion was the greater, in consequence of the absence of
the master, as well as of Mr. Collins, the steward. While some of the
domestics were employed in endeavouring to extinguish the flames, it was
thought proper that others should busy themselves in removing the most
valuable moveables to a lawn in the garden. I took some command in the
affair, to which indeed my station in the family seemed to entitle me,
and for which I was judged qualified by my understanding and mental
resources.

Having given some general directions, I conceived, that it was not
enough to stand by and superintend, but that I should contribute my
personal labour in the public concern. I set out for that purpose; and
my steps, by some mysterious fatality, were directed to the private
apartment at the end of the library. Here, as I looked round, my eye was
suddenly caught by the trunk mentioned in the first pages of my
narrative.

My mind was already raised to its utmost pitch. In a window-seat of the
room lay a number of chisels and other carpenter's tools. I know not
what infatuation instantaneously seized me. The idea was too powerful to
be resisted. I forgot the business upon which I came, the employment of
the servants, and the urgency of general danger. I should have done the
same if the flames that seemed to extend as they proceeded, and already
surmounted the house, had reached this very apartment. I snatched a tool
suitable for the purpose, threw myself upon the ground, and applied with
eagerness to a magazine which inclosed all for which my heart panted.
After two or three efforts, in which the energy of uncontrollable
passion was added to my bodily strength, the fastenings gave way, the
trunk opened, and all that I sought was at once within my reach.

I was in the act of lifting up the lid, when Mr. Falkland entered, wild,
breathless, distracted in his looks! He had been brought home from a
considerable distance by the sight of the flames. At the moment of his
appearance the lid dropped down from my hand. He no sooner saw me than
his eyes emitted sparks of rage. He ran with eagerness to a brace of
loaded pistols which hung in the room, and, seizing one, presented it to
my head. I saw his design, and sprang to avoid it; but, with the same
rapidity with which he had formed his resolution, he changed it, and
instantly went to the window, and flung the pistol into the court below.
He bade me begone with his usual irresistible energy; and, overcome as
I was already by the horror of the detection, I eagerly complied.

A moment after, a considerable part of the chimney tumbled with noise
into the court below, and a voice exclaimed that the fire was more
violent than ever. These circumstances seemed to produce a mechanical
effect upon my patron, who, having first locked the closet, appeared on
the outside of the house, ascended the roof, and was in a moment in
every place where his presence was required. The flames were at length
extinguished.

The reader can with difficulty form a conception of the state to which I
was now reduced. My act was in some sort an act of insanity; but how
undescribable are the feelings with which I looked back upon it! It was
an instantaneous impulse, a short-lived and passing alienation of mind;
but what must Mr. Falkland think of that alienation? To any man a person
who had once shown himself capable of so wild a flight of the mind, must
appear dangerous: how must he appear to a man under Mr. Falkland's
circumstances? I had just had a pistol held to my head, by a man
resolved to put a period to my existence. That indeed was past; but what
was it that fate had yet in reserve for me! The insatiable vengeance of
a Falkland, of a man whose hands were, to my apprehension, red with
blood, and his thoughts familiar with cruelty and murder. How great were
the resources of his mind, resources henceforth to be confederated for
my destruction! This was the termination of an ungoverned curiosity, an
impulse that I had represented to myself as so innocent or so venial.

In the high tide of boiling passion I had overlooked all consequences.
It now appeared to me like a dream. Is it in man to leap from the
high-raised precipice, or rush unconcerned into the midst of flames? Was
it possible I could have forgotten for a moment the awe-creating manners
of Falkland, and the inexorable fury I should awake in his soul? No
thought of future security had reached my mind. I had acted upon no
plan. I had conceived no means of concealing my deed, after it had once
been effected. But it was over now. One short minute had effected a
reverse in my situation, the suddenness of which the history of man,
perhaps is unable to surpass.

I have always been at a loss to account for my having plunged thus
headlong into an act so monstrous. There is something in it of
unexplained and involuntary sympathy. One sentiment flows, by necessity
of nature, into another sentiment of the same general character. This
was the first instance in which I had witnessed a danger by fire. All
was confusion around me, and all changed into hurricane within. The
general situation, to my unpractised apprehension, appeared desperate,
and I by contagion became alike desperate. At first I had been in some
degree calm and collected, but that too was a desperate effort; and when
it gave way, a kind of instant insanity became its successor.

I had now every thing to fear. And yet what was my fault? It proceeded
from none of those errors which are justly held up to the aversion of
mankind; my object had been neither wealth, nor the means of indulgence,
nor the usurpation of power. No spark of malignity had harboured in my
soul. I had always reverenced the sublime mind of Mr. Falkland; I
reverenced it still. My offence had merely been a mistaken thirst of
knowledge. Such however it was, as to admit neither of forgiveness nor
remission. This epoch was the crisis of my fate, dividing what may be
called the offensive part from the defensive, which has been the sole
business of my remaining years. Alas! my offence was short, not
aggravated by any sinister intention: but the reprisals I was to suffer
are long, and can terminate only with my life!

In the state in which I found myself, when the recollection of what I
had done flowed back upon my mind, I was incapable of any resolution.
All was chaos and uncertainty within me. My thoughts were too full of
horror to be susceptible of activity. I felt deserted of my intellectual
powers, palsied in mind, and compelled to sit in speechless expectation
of the misery to which I was destined. To my own conception I was like a
man, who, though blasted with lightning, and deprived for ever of the
power of motion, should yet retain the consciousness of his situation.
Death-dealing despair was the only idea of which I was sensible.

I was still in this situation of mind when Mr. Falkland sent for me. His
message roused me from my trance. In recovering, I felt those sickening
and loathsome sensations, which a man may be supposed at first to endure
who should return from the sleep of death. Gradually I recovered the
power of arranging my ideas and directing my steps. I understood, that
the minute the affair of the fire was over Mr. Falkland had retired to
his own room. It was evening before he ordered me to be called.

I found in him every token of extreme distress, except that there was an
air of solemn and sad composure that crowned the whole. For the present,
all appearance of gloom, stateliness, and austerity was gone. As I
entered he looked up, and, seeing who it was, ordered me to bolt the
door. I obeyed. He went round the room, and examined its other avenues.
He then returned to where I stood. I trembled in every joint of my
frame. I exclaimed within myself, "What scene of death has Roscius now
to act?"

"Williams!" said he, in a tone which had more in it of sorrow than
resentment, "I have attempted your life! I am a wretch devoted to the
scorn and execration of mankind!" There he stopped.

"If there be one being on the whole earth that feels the scorn and
execration due to such a wretch more strongly than another, it is
myself. I have been kept in a state of perpetual torture and madness.
But I can put an end to it and its consequences; and, so far at least as
relates to you, I am determined to do it. I know the price, and--I will
make the purchase.

"You must swear," said he. "You must attest every sacrament, divine and
human, never to disclose what I am now to tell you."--He dictated the
oath, and I repeated it with an aching heart. I had no power to offer a
word of remark.

"This confidence," said he, "is of your seeking, not of mine. It is
odious to me, and is dangerous to you."

Having thus prefaced the disclosure he had to make, he paused. He seemed
to collect himself as for an effort of magnitude. He wiped his face with
his handkerchief. The moisture that incommoded him appeared not to be
tears, but sweat.

"Look at me. Observe me. Is it not strange that such a one as I should
retain lineaments of a human creature? I am the blackest of villains. I
am the murderer of Tyrrel. I am the assassin of the Hawkinses."

I started with terror, and was silent.

"What a story is mine! Insulted, disgraced, polluted in the face of
hundreds, I was capable of any act of desperation. I watched my
opportunity, followed Mr. Tyrrel from the rooms, seized a sharp-pointed
knife that fell in my way, came behind him, and stabbed him to the
heart. My gigantic oppressor rolled at my feet.

"All are but links of one chain. A blow! A murder! My next business was
to defend myself, to tell so well-digested a lie as that all mankind
should believe it true. Never was a task so harrowing and intolerable!

"Well, thus far fortune favoured me; she favoured me beyond my desire.
The guilt was removed from me, and cast upon another; but this I was to
endure. Whence came the circumstantial evidence against him, the broken
knife and the blood, I am unable to tell. I suppose, by some miraculous
accident, Hawkins was passing by, and endeavoured to assist his
oppressor in the agonies of death. You have heard his story; you have
read one of his letters. But you do not know the thousandth part of the
proofs of his simple and unalterable rectitude that I have known. His
son suffered with him; that son, for the sake of whose happiness and
virtue he ruined himself, and would have died a hundred times.--I have
had feelings, but I cannot describe them.

"This it is to be a gentleman! a man of honour! I was the fool of fame.
My virtue, my honesty, my everlasting peace of mind, were cheap
sacrifices to be made at the shrine of this divinity. But, what is
worse, there is nothing that has happened that has in any degree
contributed to my cure. I am as much the fool of fame as ever. I cling
to it to my last breath. Though I be the blackest of villains, I will
leave behind me a spotless and illustrious name. There is no crime so
malignant, no scene of blood so horrible, in which that object cannot
engage me. It is no matter that I regard these things at a distance with
aversion;--I am sure of it; bring me to the test, and I shall yield. I
despise myself, but thus I am; things are gone too far to be recalled.

"Why is it that I am compelled to this confidence? From the love of
fame. I should tremble at the sight of every pistol or instrument of
death that offered itself to my hands; and perhaps my next murder may
not be so fortunate as those I have already committed. I had no
alternative but to make you my confidant or my victim. It was better to
trust you with the whole truth under every seal of secrecy, than to live
in perpetual fear of your penetration or your rashness.

"Do you know what it is you have done? To gratify a foolishly
inquisitive humour, you have sold yourself. You shall continue in my
service, but can never share my affection. I will benefit you in respect
of fortune, but I shall always hate you. If ever an unguarded word
escape from your lips, if ever you excite my jealousy or suspicion,
expect to pay for it by your death or worse. It is a dear bargain you
have made. But it is too late to look back. I charge and adjure you by
every thing that is sacred, and that is tremendous, preserve your faith!

"My tongue has now for the first time for several years spoken the
language of my heart; and the intercourse from this hour shall be shut
for ever. I want no pity. I desire no consolation. Surrounded as I am
with horrors, I will at least preserve my fortitude to the last. If I
had been reserved to a different destiny, I have qualities in that
respect worthy of a better cause. I can be mad, miserable, and frantic;
but even in frenzy I can preserve my presence of mind and discretion."

Such was the story I had been so desirous to know. Though my mind had
brooded upon the subject for months, there was not a syllable of it that
did not come to my ear with the most perfect sense of novelty. "Mr.
Falkland is a murderer!" said I, as I retired from the conference. This
dreadful appellative, "a murderer," made my very blood run cold within
me. "He killed Mr. Tyrrel, for he could not control his resentment and
anger: he sacrificed Hawkins the elder and Hawkins the younger, because
he could upon no terms endure the public loss of honour: how can I
expect that a man thus passionate and unrelenting will not sooner or
later make me his victim?"

But, notwithstanding this terrible application of the story, an
application to which perhaps in some form or other, mankind are indebted
for nine tenths of their abhorrence against vice, I could not help
occasionally recurring to reflections of an opposite nature. "Mr.
Falkland is a murderer!" resumed I. "He might yet be a most excellent
man, if he did but think so." It is the thinking ourselves vicious then,
that principally contributes to make us vicious.

Amidst the shock I received from finding, what I had never suffered
myself constantly to believe, that my suspicions were true, I still
discovered new cause of admiration for my master. His menaces indeed
were terrible. But, when I recollected the offence I had given, so
contrary to every received principle of civilised society, so insolent
and rude, so intolerable to a man of Mr. Falkland's elevation, and in
Mr. Falkland's peculiarity of circumstances, I was astonished at his
forbearance. There were indeed sufficiently obvious reasons why he might
not choose to proceed to extremities with me. But how different from the
fearful expectations I had conceived were the calmness of his
behaviour, and the regulated mildness of his language! In this respect,
I for a short time imagined that I was emancipated from the mischiefs
which had appalled me; and that, in having to do with a man of Mr.
Falkland's liberality, I had nothing rigorous to apprehend.

"It is a miserable prospect," said I, "that he holds up to me. He
imagines that I am restrained by no principles, and deaf to the claims
of personal excellence. But he shall find himself mistaken. I will never
become an informer. I will never injure my patron; and therefore he will
not be my enemy. With all his misfortunes and all his errors, I feel
that my soul yearns for his welfare. If he have been criminal, that is
owing to circumstances; the same qualities under other circumstances
would have been, or rather were, sublimely beneficent."

My reasonings were, no doubt, infinitely more favourable to Mr.
Falkland, than those which human beings are accustomed to make in the
case of such as they style great criminals. This will not be wondered
at, when it is considered that I had myself just been trampling on the
established boundaries of obligation, and therefore might well have a
fellow-feeling for other offenders. Add to which, I had known Mr.
Falkland from the first as a beneficent divinity. I had observed at
leisure, and with a minuteness which could not deceive me, the excellent
qualities of his heart; and I found him possessed of a mind beyond
comparison the most fertile and accomplished I had ever known.

But though the terrors which had impressed me were considerably
alleviated, my situation was notwithstanding sufficiently miserable. The
ease and light-heartedness of my youth were for ever gone. The voice of
an irresistible necessity had commanded me to "sleep no more." I was
tormented with a secret, of which I must never disburthen myself; and
this consciousness was, at my age, a source of perpetual melancholy. I
had made myself a prisoner, in the most intolerable sense of that term,
for years--perhaps for the rest of my life. Though my prudence and
discretion should be invariable, I must remember that I should have an
overseer, vigilant from conscious guilt, full of resentment at the
unjustifiable means by which I had extorted from him a confession, and
whose lightest caprice might at any time decide upon every thing that
was dear to me. The vigilance even of a public and systematical
despotism is poor, compared with a vigilance which is thus goaded by the
most anxious passions of the soul. Against this species of persecution I
knew not how to invent a refuge. I dared neither fly from the
observation of Mr. Falkland, nor continue exposed to its operation. I
was at first indeed lulled in a certain degree to security upon the
verge of the precipice. But it was not long before I found a thousand
circumstances perpetually reminding me of my true situation. Those I am
now to relate are among the most memorable.




CHAPTER VII.


In no long time after the disclosure Mr. Falkland had made, Mr.
Forester, his elder brother by the mother's side, came to reside for a
short period in our family. This was a circumstance peculiarly adverse
to my patron's habits and inclinations. He had broken off, as I have
already said, all intercourse of visiting with his neighbours. He
debarred himself every kind of amusement and relaxation. He shrunk from
the society of his fellows, and thought he could never be sufficiently
buried in obscurity and solitude. This principle was, in most cases, of
no difficult execution to a man of firmness. But Mr. Falkland knew not
how to avoid the visit of Mr. Forester. This gentleman was just returned
from a residence of several years upon the continent; and his demand of
an apartment in the house of his half-brother, till his own house at the
distance of thirty miles should be prepared for his reception, was made
with an air of confidence that scarcely admitted of a refusal. Mr.
Falkland could only allege, that the state of his health and spirits was
such, that he feared a residence at his house would be little agreeable
to his kinsman; and Mr. Forester conceived that this was a
disqualification which would always augment in proportion as it was
tolerated, and hoped that his society, by inducing Mr. Falkland to
suspend his habits of seclusion, would be the means of essential
benefit. Mr. Falkland opposed him no further. He would have been sorry
to be thought unkind to a kinsman for whom he had a particular esteem;
and the consciousness of not daring to assign the true reason, made him
cautious of adhering to his objection.

The character of Mr. Forester was, in many respects, the reverse of that
of my master. His very appearance indicated the singularity of his
disposition. His figure was short and angular. His eyes were sunk far
into his head, and were overhung with eye-brows, black, thick, and
bushy. His complexion was swarthy, and his lineaments hard. He had seen
much of the world; but, to judge of him from his appearance and manners,
one would have thought that he had never moved from his fire-side.

His temper was acid, petulant, and harsh. He was easily offended by
trifles, respecting which, previously to the offence, the persons with
whom he had intercourse could have no suspicion of such a result. When
offended, his customary behaviour was exceedingly rugged. He thought
only of setting the delinquent right, and humbling him for his error;
and, in his eagerness to do this, overlooked the sensibility of the
sufferer, and the pains he inflicted. Remonstrance in such a case he
regarded as the offspring of cowardice, which was to be extirpated with
a steady and unshrinking hand, and not soothed with misjudging kindness
and indulgence. As is usual in human character, he had formed a system
of thinking to suit the current of his feelings. He held that the
kindness we entertain for a man should be veiled and concealed, exerted
in substantial benefits, but not disclosed, lest an undue advantage
should be taken of it by its object.

With this rugged outside, Mr. Forester had a warm and generous heart. At
first sight all men were deterred by his manner, and excited to give him
an ill character. But the longer any one knew him, the more they
approved him. His harshness was then only considered as habit; and
strong sense and active benevolence were uppermost in the recollection
of his familiar acquaintance. His conversation, when he condescended to
lay aside his snappish, rude, and abrupt half-sentences, became flowing
in diction, and uncommonly amusing with regard to its substance. He
combined, with weightiness of expression, a dryness of characteristic
humour, that demonstrated at once the vividness of his observation, and
the force of his understanding. The peculiarities of this gentleman's
character were not undisplayed in the scene to which he was now
introduced. Having much kindness in his disposition, he soon became
deeply interested in the unhappiness of his relation. He did every thing
in his power to remove it; but his attempts were rude and unskilful.
With a mind so accomplished and a spirit so susceptible as that of Mr.
Falkland, Mr. Forester did not venture to let loose his usual violence
of manner; but, if he carefully abstained from harshness, he was however
wholly incapable of that sweet and liquid eloquence of the soul, which
would perhaps have stood the fairest chance of seducing Mr. Falkland for
a moment to forget his anguish. He exhorted his host to rouse up his
spirit, and defy the foul fiend; but the tone of his exhortations found
no sympathetic chord in the mind of my patron. He had not the skill to
carry conviction to an understanding so well fortified in error. In a
word, after a thousand efforts of kindness to his entertainer, he drew
off his forces, growling and dissatisfied with his own impotence, rather
than angry at the obstinacy of Mr. Falkland. He felt no diminution of
his affection for him, and was sincerely grieved to find that he was so
little capable of serving him. Both parties in this case did justice to
the merits of the other; at the same time that the disparity of their
humours was such, as to prevent the stranger from being in any degree a
dangerous companion to the master of the house. They had scarcely one
point of contact in their characters. Mr. Forester was incapable of
giving Mr. Falkland that degree either of pain or pleasure, which can
raise the soul into a tumult, and deprive it for a while of tranquillity
and self-command.

Our visitor was a man, notwithstanding appearances, of a peculiarly
sociable disposition, and, where he was neither interrupted nor
contradicted, considerably loquacious. He began to feel himself
painfully out of his element upon the present occasion. Mr. Falkland
was devoted to contemplation and solitude. He put upon himself some
degree of restraint upon the arrival of his kinsman, though even then
his darling habits would break out. But when they had seen each other a
certain number of times, and it was sufficiently evident that the
society of either would be a burthen rather than a pleasure to the
other, they consented, by a sort of silent compact, that each should be
at liberty to follow his own inclination. Mr. Falkland was, in a sense,
the greatest gainer by this. He returned to the habits of his choice,
and acted, as nearly as possible, just as he would have done if Mr.
Forester had not been in existence. But the latter was wholly at a loss.
He had all the disadvantages of retirement, without being able, as he
might have done at his house, to bring his own associates or his own
amusements about him.

In this situation he cast his eyes upon me. It was his principle to do
every thing that his thoughts suggested, without caring for the forms of
the world. He saw no reason why a peasant, with certain advantages of
education and opportunity, might not be as eligible a companion as a
lord; at the same time that he was deeply impressed with the
venerableness of old institutions. Reduced as he was to a kind of last
resort, he found me better qualified for his purpose than any other of
Mr. Falkland's household.

The manner in which he began this sort of correspondence was
sufficiently characteristical. It was abrupt; but it was strongly
stamped with essential benevolence. It was blunt and humorous; but there
was attractiveness, especially in a case of unequal intercourse, in that
very rusticity by which he levelled himself with the mass of his
species. He had to reconcile himself as well as to invite me; not to
reconcile himself to the postponing an aristocratical vanity, for of
that he had a very slender portion, but to the trouble of invitation,
for he loved his ease. All this produced some irregularity and
indecision in his own mind, and gave a whimsical impression to his
behaviour.

On my part, I was by no means ungrateful for the distinction that was
paid me. My mind had been relaxed into temporary dejection, but my
reserve had no alloy of moroseness or insensibility. It did not long
hold out against the condescending attentions of Mr. Forester. I became
gradually heedful, encouraged, confiding. I had a most eager thirst for
the knowledge of mankind; and though no person perhaps ever purchased so
dearly the instructions he received in that school, the inclination was
in no degree diminished. Mr. Forester was the second man I had seen
uncommonly worthy of my analysis, and who seemed to my thoughts, arrived
as I was at the end of my first essay, almost as much deserving to be
studied as Mr. Falkland himself. I was glad to escape from the
uneasiness of my reflections; and, while engaged with this new friend, I
forgot the criticalness of the evils with which I was hourly menaced.

Stimulated by these feelings, I was what Mr. Forester wanted, a diligent
and zealous hearer, I was strongly susceptible of impression; and the
alternate impressions my mind received, visibly displayed themselves in
my countenance and gestures. The observations Mr. Forester had made in
his travels, the set of opinions he had formed, all amused and
interested me. His manner of telling a story, or explaining his
thoughts, was forcible, perspicuous, and original: his style in
conversation had an uncommon zest. Every thing he had to relate
delighted me; while, in return, my sympathy, my eager curiosity, and my
unsophisticated passions, rendered me to Mr. Forester a most desirable
hearer. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that every day rendered
our intercourse more intimate and cordial.

Mr. Falkland was destined to be for ever unhappy; and it seemed as if no
new incident could occur, from which he was not able to extract food for
this imperious propensity. He was wearied with a perpetual repetition of
similar impressions; and entertained an invincible disgust against all
that was new. The visit of Mr. Forester he regarded with antipathy. He
was scarcely able to look at him without shuddering; an emotion which
his guest perceived, and pitied as the result of habit and disease,
rather than of judgment. None of his actions passed unremarked; the most
indifferent excited uneasiness and apprehension. The first overtures of
intimacy between me and Mr. Forester probably gave birth to sentiments
of jealousy in the mind of my master. The irregular, variable character
of his visitor tended to heighten them, by producing an appearance of
inexplicableness and mystery. At this time he intimated to me that it
was not agreeable to him, that there should be much intercourse between
me and this gentleman.

What could I do? Young as I was, could it be expected that I should play
the philosopher, and put a perpetual curb upon my inclinations?
Imprudent though I had been, could I voluntarily subject myself to an
eternal penance, and estrangement from human society? Could I discourage
a frankness so perfectly in consonance with my wishes, and receive in an
ungracious way a kindness that stole away my heart?

Besides this, I was but ill prepared for the servile submission Mr.
Falkland demanded. In early life I had been accustomed to be much my own
master. When I first entered into Mr. Falkland's service, my personal
habits were checked by the novelty of my situation, and my affections
were gained by the high accomplishments of my patron. To novelty and its
influence, curiosity had succeeded: curiosity, so long as it lasted, was
a principle stronger in my bosom than even the love of independence. To
that I would have sacrificed my liberty or my life; to gratify it, I
would have submitted to the condition of a West Indian negro, or to the
tortures inflicted by North American savages. But the turbulence of
curiosity had now subsided.

As long as the threats of Mr. Falkland had been confined to generals, I
endured it. I was conscious of the unbecoming action I had committed,
and this rendered me humble. But, when he went further, and undertook to
prescribe to every article of my conduct, my patience was at an end. My
mind, before sufficiently sensible to the unfortunate situation to which
my imprudence had reduced me, now took a nearer and a more alarming view
of the circumstances of the case. Mr. Falkland was not an old man; he
had in him the principles of vigour, however they might seem to be
shaken; he might live as long as I should. I was his prisoner; and what
a prisoner! All my actions observed; all my gestures marked. I could
move neither to the right nor the left, but the eye of my keeper was
upon me. He watched me; and his vigilance was a sickness to my heart.
For me there was no more freedom, no more of hilarity, of
thoughtlessness, or of youth. Was this the life upon which I had entered
with such warm and sanguine expectation? Were my days to be wasted in
this cheerless gloom; a galley-slave in the hands of the system of
nature, whom death only, the death of myself or my inexorable superior,
could free?

I had been adventurous in the gratification of an infantine and
unreasonable curiosity; and I resolved not to be less adventurous, if
need were, in the defence of every thing that can make life a blessing.
I was prepared for an amicable adjustment of interests: I would
undertake that Mr. Falkland should never sustain injury through my
means; but I expected in return that I should suffer no encroachment,
but be left to the direction of my own understanding.

I went on, then, to seek Mr. Forester's society with eagerness; and it
is the nature of an intimacy that does not decline, progressively to
increase. Mr. Falkland observed these symptoms with visible
perturbation. Whenever I was conscious of their being perceived by him,
I betrayed tokens of confusion: this did not tend to allay his
uneasiness. One day he spoke to me alone; and, with a look of mysterious
but terrible import, expressed himself thus:--

"Young man, take warning! Perhaps this is the last time you shall have
an opportunity to take it! I will not always be the butt of your
simplicity and inexperience, nor suffer your weakness to triumph over my
strength! Why do you trifle with me? You little suspect the extent of my
power. At this moment you are enclosed with the snares of my vengeance
unseen by you, and, at the instant that you flatter yourself you are
already beyond their reach, they will close upon you. You might as well
think of escaping from the power of the omnipresent God, as from mine!
If you could touch so much as my finger, you should expiate it in hours
and months and years of a torment, of which as yet you have not the
remotest idea. Remember! I am not talking at random! I do not utter a
word, that, if you provoke me, shall not be executed to the severest
letter!"

It may be supposed that these menaces were not without their effect. I
withdrew in silence. My whole soul revolted against the treatment I
endured, and yet I could not utter a word. Why could not I speak the
expostulations of my heart, or propose the compromise I meditated? It
was inexperience, and not want of strength, that awed me. Every act of
Mr. Falkland contained something new, and I was unprepared to meet it.
Perhaps it will be found that the greatest hero owes the propriety of
his conduct to the habit of encountering difficulties, and calling out
with promptness the energies of his mind.

I contemplated the proceedings of my patron with the deepest
astonishment. Humanity and general kindness were fundamental parts of
his character; but in relation to me they were sterile and inactive. His
own interest required that he should purchase my kindness; but he
preferred to govern me by terror, and watch me with unceasing anxiety. I
ruminated with the most mournful sensations upon the nature of my
calamity. I believed that no human being was ever placed in a situation
so pitiable as mine. Every atom of my frame seemed to have a several
existence, and to crawl within me. I had but too much reason to believe
that Mr. Falkland's threats were not empty words. I knew his ability; I
felt his ascendancy. If I encountered him, what chance had I of victory?
If I were defeated, what was the penalty I had to suffer? Well then, the
rest of my life must be devoted to slavish subjection. Miserable
sentence! And, if it were, what security had I against the injustice of
a man, vigilant, capricious, and criminal? I envied the condemned wretch
upon the scaffold; I envied the victim of the inquisition in the midst
of his torture. They know what they have to suffer. I had only to
imagine every thing terrible, and then say, "The fate reserved for me
is worse than this!"

It was well for me that these sensations were transient: human nature
could not long support itself under what I then felt. By degrees my mind
shook off its burthen. Indignation succeeded to emotions of terror. The
hostility of Mr. Falkland excited hostility in me. I determined I would
never calumniate him in matters of the most trivial import, much less
betray the grand secret upon which every thing dear to him depended.
But, totally abjuring the offensive, I resolved to stand firmly upon the
defensive. The liberty of acting as I pleased I would preserve, whatever
might be the risk. If I were worsted in the contest, I would at least
have the consolation of reflecting that I had exerted myself with
energy. In proportion as I thus determined, I drew off my forces from
petty incursions, and felt the propriety of acting with premeditation
and system. I ruminated incessantly upon plans of deliverance, but I was
anxious that my choice should not be precipitately made.

It was during this period of my deliberation and uncertainty that Mr.
Forester terminated his visit. He observed a strange distance in my
behaviour, and, in his good-natured, rough way, reproached me for it. I
could only answer with a gloomy look of mysterious import, and a
mournful and expressive silence. He sought me for an explanation, but I
was now as ingenious in avoiding as I had before been ardent to seek
him; and he quitted our house, as he afterwards told me, with an
impression, that there was some ill destiny that hung over it, which
seemed fated to make all its inhabitants miserable, without its being
possible for a bystander to penetrate the reason.




CHAPTER VIII.


Mr. Forester had left us about three weeks, when Mr. Falkland sent me
upon some business to an estate he possessed in a neighbouring county,
about fifty miles from his principal residence. The road led in a
direction wholly wide of the habitation of our late visitor. I was upon
my return from the place to which I had been sent, when I began in fancy
to take a survey of the various circumstances of my condition, and by
degrees lost, in the profoundness of my contemplation, all attention to
the surrounding objects. The first determination of my mind was to
escape from the lynx-eyed jealousy and despotism of Mr. Falkland; the
second to provide, by every effort of prudence and deliberation I could
devise, against the danger with which I well knew my attempt must be
accompanied.

Occupied with these meditations, I rode many miles before I perceived
that I had totally deviated from the right path. At length I roused
myself, and surveyed the horizon round me; but I could observe nothing
with which my organ was previously acquainted. On three sides, the heath
stretched as far as the eye could reach; on the fourth, I discovered at
some distance a wood of no ordinary dimensions. Before me, scarcely a
single track could be found, to mark that any human being had ever
visited the spot. As the best expedient I could devise, I bent my course
towards the wood I have mentioned, and then pursued, as well as I was
able, the windings of the inclosure. This led me, after some time, to
the end of the heath; but I was still as much at a loss as ever
respecting the road I should pursue. The sun was hid from me by a grey
and cloudy atmosphere; I was induced to continue along the skirts of
the wood, and surmounted with some difficulty the hedges and other
obstacles that from time to time presented themselves. My thoughts were
gloomy and disconsolate; the dreariness of the day, and the solitude
which surrounded me, seemed to communicate a sadness to my soul. I had
proceeded a considerable way, and was overcome with hunger and fatigue,
when I discovered a road and a little inn at no great distance. I made
up to them, and upon enquiry found that, instead of pursuing the proper
direction, I had taken one that led to Mr. Forester's rather than to my
own habitation. I alighted, and was entering the house, when the
appearance of that gentleman struck my eyes.

Mr. Forester accosted me with kindness, invited me into the room where
he had been sitting, and enquired what accident had brought me to that
place.

While he was speaking, I could not help recollecting the extraordinary
manner in which we were thus once more brought together, and a train of
ideas was by this means suggested to my mind. Some refreshment was, by
Mr. Forester's order, prepared for me; I sat down, and partook of it.
Still this thought dwelt upon my recollection:--"Mr. Falkland will never
be made acquainted with our meeting; I have an opportunity thrown in my
way, which if I do not improve, I shall deserve all the consequences
that may result. I can now converse with a friend, and a powerful
friend, without fear of being watched and overlooked." What wonder that
I was tempted to disclose, not Mr. Falkland's secret, but my own
situation, and receive the advice of a man of worth and experience,
which might perhaps be adequately done without entering into any detail
injurious to my patron?

Mr. Forester, on his part, expressed a desire to learn why it was I
thought myself unhappy, and why I had avoided him during the latter part
of his residence under the same roof, as evidently as I had before taken
pleasure in his communications. I replied, that I could give him but an
imperfect satisfaction upon these points; but what I could, I would
willingly explain. The fact, I proceeded, was, that there were reasons
which rendered it impossible for me to have a tranquil moment under the
roof of Mr. Falkland. I had revolved the matter again and again in my
mind, and was finally convinced that I owed it to myself to withdraw
from his service. I added, that I was sensible, by this half-confidence,
I might rather seem to merit the disapprobation of Mr. Forester than his
countenance; but I declared my persuasion that, if he could be
acquainted with the whole affair, however strange my behaviour might at
present appear, he would applaud my reserve.

He appeared to muse for a moment upon what I had said, and then asked
what reason I could have to complain of Mr. Falkland? I replied, that I
entertained the deepest reverence for my patron; I admired his
abilities, and considered him as formed for the benefit of his species.
I should in my own opinion be the vilest of miscreants, if I uttered a
whisper to his disadvantage. But this did not avail: I was not fit for
him; perhaps I was not good enough for him; at all events, I must be
perpetually miserable so long as I continued to live with him.

I observed Mr. Forester gaze upon me eagerly with curiosity and
surprise; but this circumstance I did not think proper to notice. Having
recovered himself, he enquired, why then, that being the case, I did not
quit his service? I answered, what he now touched upon was that which
most of all contributed to my misfortune. Mr. Falkland was not ignorant
of my dislike to my present situation; perhaps he thought it
unreasonable, unjust; but I knew that he would never be brought to
consent to my giving way to it.

Here Mr. Forester interrupted me, and, smiling, said, I magnified
obstacles, and over-rated my own importance; adding, that he would
undertake to remove that difficulty, as well as to provide me with a
more agreeable appointment. This suggestion produced in me a serious
alarm. I replied, that I must entreat him upon no account to think of
applying to Mr. Falkland upon the subject. I added, that perhaps I was
only betraying my imbecility; but in reality, unacquainted as I was with
experience and the world, I was afraid, though disgusted with my present
residence, to expose myself upon a mere project of my own, to the
resentment of so considerable a man as Mr. Falkland. If he would favour
me with his advice upon the subject, or if he would only give me leave
to hope for his protection in case of any unforeseen accident, this was
all I presumed to request; and, thus encouraged. I would venture to obey
the dictates of my inclination, and fly in pursuit of my lost
tranquillity.

Having thus opened myself to this generous friend, as far as I could do
it with propriety and safety, he sat for some time silent, with an air
of deep reflection. At length, with a countenance of unusual severity,
and a characteristic fierceness of manner and voice, he thus addressed
me: "Young man, perhaps you are ignorant of the nature of the conduct
you at present hold. May be, you do not know that where there is
mystery, there is always something at bottom that will not bear the
telling. Is this the way to obtain the favour of a man of consequence
and respectability? To pretend to make a confidence, and then tell him a
disjointed story that has not common sense in it!"

I answered, that, whatever were the amount of that prejudice, I must
submit. I placed my hope of a candid construction, in the present
instance, in the rectitude of his nature.

He went on: "You do so; do you? I tell you, sir, the rectitude of my
nature is an enemy to disguise. Come, boy, you must know that I
understand these things better than you. Tell all, or expect nothing
from me but censure and contempt."

"Sir," replied I, "I have spoken from deliberation; I have told you my
choice, and, whatever be the result, I must abide by it. If in this
misfortune you refuse me your assistance, here I must end, having gained
by the communication only your ill opinion and displeasure."

He looked hard at me, as if he would see me through. At length he
relaxed his features, and softened his manner. "You are a foolish,
headstrong boy," said he, "and I shall have an eye upon you. I shall
never place in you the confidence I have done. But--I will not desert
you. At present, the balance between approbation and dislike is in your
favour. How long it will last, I cannot tell; I engage for nothing. But
it is my rule to act as I feel. I will for this time do as you
require;--and, pray God, it may answer. I will receive you, either now
or hereafter, under my roof, trusting that I shall have no reason to
repent, and that appearances will terminate as favourably as I wish,
though I scarcely know how to hope it."

We were engaged in the earnest discussion of subjects thus interesting
to my peace, when we were interrupted by an event the most earnestly to
have been deprecated. Without the smallest notice, and as if he had
dropped upon us from the clouds, Mr. Falkland burst into the room. I
found afterwards that Mr. Forester had come thus far upon an
appointment to meet Mr. Falkland, and that the place of their intended
rendezvous was at the next stage. Mr. Forester was detained at the inn
where we now were by our accidental rencounter, and in reality had for
the moment forgotten his appointment; while Mr. Falkland, not finding
him where he expected, proceeded thus far towards the house of his
kinsman. To me the meeting was most unaccountable in the world.

I instantly foresaw the dreadful complication of misfortune that was
included in this event. To Mr. Falkland, the meeting between me and his
relation must appear not accidental, but, on my part at least, the
result of design. I was totally out of the road I had been travelling by
his direction; I was in a road that led directly to the house of Mr.
Forester. What must he think of this? How must he suppose I came to that
place? The truth, if told, that I came there without design, and purely
in consequence of having lost my way, must appear to be the most
palpable lie that ever was devised.

Here then I stood detected in the fact of that intercourse which had
been so severely forbidden. But in this instance it was infinitely worse
than in those which had already given so much disturbance to Mr.
Falkland. It was then frank and unconcealed; and therefore the
presumption was, that it was for purposes that required no concealment.
But the present interview, if concerted, was in the most emphatical
degree clandestine. Nor was it less perilous than it was clandestine: it
had been forbidden with the most dreadful menaces; and Mr. Falkland was
not ignorant how deep an impression those menaces had made upon my
imagination. Such a meeting therefore could not have been concerted
under such circumstances, for a trivial purpose, or for any purpose
that his heart did not ache to think of. Such was the amount of my
crime, such was the agony my appearance was calculated to inspire; and
it was reasonable to suppose that the penalty I had to expect would be
proportionable. The threats of Mr. Falkland still sounded in my ears,
and I was in a transport of terror.

The conduct of the same man in different circumstances, is often so
various as to render it very difficult to be accounted for. Mr.
Falkland, in this to him, terrible crisis, did not seem to be in any
degree hurried away by passion. For a moment he was dumb; his eyes
glared with astonishment; and the next moment, as it were, he had the
most perfect calmness and self-command. Had it been otherwise, I have no
doubt that I should instantly have entered into an explanation of the
manner in which I came there, the ingenuousness and consistency of which
could not but have been in some degree attended with a favourable event.
But, as it was, I suffered myself to be overcome; I yielded, as in a
former instance, to the discomfiting influence of surprise. I dared
scarcely breathe; I observed the appearances with equal anxiety and
surprise. Mr. Falkland quietly ordered me to return home, and take along
with me the groom he had brought with him. I obeyed in silence.

I afterwards understood, that he enquired minutely of Mr. Forester the
circumstances of our meeting; and that that gentleman, perceiving that
the meeting itself was discovered, and guided by habits of frankness,
which, when once rooted in a character, it is difficult to counteract,
told Mr. Falkland every thing that had passed, together with the remarks
it had suggested to his own mind. Mr. Falkland received the
communication with an ambiguous and studied silence, which by no means
operated to my advantage in the already poisoned mind of Mr. Forester.
His silence was partly the direct consequence of a mind watchful,
inquisitive, and doubting; and partly perhaps was adopted for the sake
of the effect it was calculated to produce, Mr. Falkland not being
unwilling to encourage prejudices against a character which might one
day come in competition with his own.

As to me, I went home indeed, for this was not a moment to resist. Mr.
Falkland, with a premeditation to which he had given the appearance of
accident, had taken care to send with me a guard to attend upon his
prisoner. I seemed as if conducting to one of those fortresses, famed in
the history of despotism, from which the wretched victim is never known
to come forth alive; and when I entered my chamber, I felt as if I were
entering a dungeon. I reflected that I was at the mercy of a man,
exasperated at my disobedience, and who was already formed to cruelty by
successive murders. My prospects were now closed; I was cut off for ever
from pursuits that I had meditated with ineffable delight; my death
might be the event of a few hours. I was a victim at the shrine of
conscious guilt, that knew neither rest nor satiety; I should be blotted
from the catalogue of the living, and my fate remain eternally a secret;
the man who added my murder to his former crimes, would show himself the
next morning, and be hailed with the admiration and applause of his
species.

In the midst of these terrible imaginations, one idea presented itself
that alleviated my feelings. This was the recollection of the strange
and unaccountable tranquillity which Mr. Falkland had manifested, when
he discovered me in company with Mr. Forester. I was not deceived by
this. I knew that the calm was temporary, and would be succeeded by a
tumult and whirlwind of the most dreadful sort. But a man under the
power of such terrors as now occupied me catches at every reed. I said
to myself, "This tranquillity is a period it is incumbent upon me to
improve; the shorter its duration may be found, the more speedy am I
obliged to be in the use of it." In a word, I took the resolution,
because I already stood in fear of the vengeance of Mr. Falkland, to
risk the possibility of provoking it in a degree still more inexpiable,
and terminate at once my present state of uncertainty. I had now opened
my case to Mr. Forester, and he had given me positive assurances of his
protection. I determined immediately to address the following letter to
Mr. Falkland. The consideration that, if he meditated any thing
tragical, such a letter would only tend to confirm him, did not enter
into the present feelings of my mind.

"Sir,

"I have conceived the intention of quitting your service. This is a
measure we ought both of us to desire. I shall then be, what it is my
duty to be, master of my own actions. You will be delivered from the
presence of a person, whom you cannot prevail upon yourself to behold
without unpleasing emotions.

"Why should you subject me to an eternal penance? Why should you consign
my youthful hopes to suffering and despair? Consult the principles of
humanity that have marked the general course of your proceedings, and do
not let me, I entreat you, be made the subject of a useless severity. My
heart is impressed with gratitude for your favours. I sincerely ask your
forgiveness for the many errors of my conduct. I consider the treatment
I have received under your roof, as one almost uninterrupted scene of
kindness and generosity. I shall never forget my obligations to you,
and will never betray them.

"I remain, Sir,

"Your most grateful, respectful,

"and dutiful servant,

"CALEB WILLIAMS."

Such was my employment of the evening of a day which will be ever
memorable in the history of my life. Mr. Falkland not being yet
returned, though expected every hour, I was induced to make use of the
pretence of fatigue to avoid an interview. I went to bed. It may be
imagined that my slumbers were neither deep nor refreshing.

The next morning I was informed that my patron did not come home till
late; that he had enquired for me, and, being told that I was in bed,
had said nothing further upon the subject. Satisfied in this respect, I
went to the breakfasting parlour, and, though full of anxiety and
trepidation, endeavoured to busy myself in arranging the books, and a
few other little occupations, till Mr. Falkland should come down. After
a short time I heard his step, which I perfectly well knew how to
distinguish, in the passage. Presently he stopped, and, speaking to some
one in a sort of deliberate, but smothered voice, I overheard him repeat
my name as enquiring for me. In conformity to the plan I had persuaded
myself to adopt, I now laid the letter I had written upon the table at
which he usually sat, and made my exit at one door as Mr. Falkland
entered at the other. This done, I withdrew, with flutterings and
palpitation, to a private apartment, a sort of light closet at the end
of the library, where I was accustomed not unfrequently to sit.

I had not been here three minutes, when I heard the voice of Mr.
Falkland calling me. I went to him in the library. His manner was that
of a man labouring with some dreadful thought, and endeavouring to give
an air of carelessness and insensibility to his behaviour. Perhaps no
carriage of any other sort could have produced a sensation of such
inexplicable horror, or have excited, in the person who was its object,
such anxious uncertainty about the event.--"That is your letter," said
he, throwing it.

"My lad," continued he, "I believe now you have played all your tricks,
and the farce is nearly at an end! With your apishness and absurdity
however you have taught me one thing; and, whereas before I have winced
at them with torture, I am now as tough as an elephant. I shall crush
you in the end with the same indifference, that I would any other little
insect that disturbed my serenity.

"I am unable to tell what brought about your meeting with Mr. Forester
yesterday. It might be design; it might be accident. But, I shall not
forget it. You write me here, that you are desirous to quit my service.
To that I have a short answer: You never shall quit it with life. If you
attempt it, you shall never cease to rue your folly as long as you
exist. That is my will; and I will not have it resisted. The very next
time you disobey me in that or any other article, there is an end of
your vagaries for ever. Perhaps your situation may be a pitiable one; it
is for you to look to that. I only know that it is in your power to
prevent its growing worse; no time nor chance shall ever make it better.

"Do not imagine I am afraid of you! I wear an armour, against which all
your weapons are impotent. I have dug a pit for you; and, whichever way
you move, backward or forward, to the right or the left, it is ready to
swallow you. Be still! If once you fall, call as loud as you will, no
man on earth shall hear your cries; prepare a tale however plausible, or
however true, the whole world shall execrate you for an impostor. Your
innocence shall be of no service to you; I laugh at so feeble a defence.
It is I that say it; you may believe what I tell you--Do you not know,
miserable wretch!" added he, suddenly altering his tone, and stamping
upon the ground with fury, "that I have sworn to preserve my reputation,
whatever be the expense; that I love it more than the whole world and
its inhabitants taken together? And do you think that you shall wound
it? Begone, miscreant! reptile! and cease to contend with insurmountable
power!"

The part of my history which I am now relating is that which I reflect
upon with the least complacency. Why was it, that I was once more
totally overcome by the imperious carriage of Mr. Falkland, and unable
to utter a word? The reader will be presented with many occasions in the
sequel, in which I wanted neither facility in the invention of
expedients, nor fortitude in entering upon my justification. Persecution
at length gave firmness to my character, and taught me the better part
of manhood. But in the present instance I was irresolute, overawed, and
abashed.

The speech I had heard was the dictate of frenzy, and it created in me a
similar frenzy. It determined me to do the very thing against which I
was thus solemnly warned, and fly from my patron's house. I could not
enter into parley with him; I could no longer endure the vile
subjugation he imposed on me. It was in vain that my reason warned me of
the rashness of a measure, to be taken without concert or preparation. I
seemed to be in a state in which reason had no power. I felt as if I
could coolly survey the several arguments of the case, perceive that
they had prudence, truth, and common sense on their side; and then
answer, I am under the guidance of a director more energetic than you.

I was not long in executing what I had thus rapidly determined. I fixed
on the evening of that very day as the period of my evasion. Even in
this short interval I had perhaps sufficient time for deliberation. But
all opportunity was useless to me; my mind was fixed, and each
succeeding moment only increased the unspeakable eagerness with which I
meditated my escape. The hours usually observed by our family in this
country residence were regular; and one in the morning was the time I
selected for my undertaking.

In searching the apartment where I slept, I had formerly discovered a
concealed door, which led to a small apartment of the most secret
nature, not uncommon in houses so old as that of Mr. Falkland, and which
had perhaps served as a refuge from persecution, or a security from the
inveterate hostilities of a barbarous age. I believed no person was
acquainted with this hiding-place but myself. I felt unaccountably
impelled to remove into it the different articles of my personal
property. I could not at present take them away with me. If I were never
to recover them, I felt that it would be a gratification to my
sentiment, that no trace of my existence should be found after my
departure. Having completed their removal, and waited till the hour I
had previously chosen, I stole down quietly from my chamber with a lamp
in my hand. I went along a passage that led to a small door opening into
the garden, and then crossed the garden, to a gate that intersected an
elm-walk and a private horse-path on the outside.

I could scarcely believe my good fortune in having thus far executed my
design without interruption. The terrible images Mr. Falkland's menaces
had suggested to my mind, made me expect impediment and detection at
every step; though the impassioned state of my mind impelled me to
advance with desperate resolution. He probably however counted too
securely upon the ascendancy of his sentiments, when imperiously
pronounced, to think it necessary to take precautions against a sinister
event. For myself, I drew a favourable omen as to the final result of my
project, from the smoothness of success that attended it in the outset.




CHAPTER IX.


The first plan that had suggested itself to me was, to go to the nearest
public road, and take the earliest stage for London. There I believed I
should be most safe from discovery, if the vengeance of Mr. Falkland
should prompt him to pursue me; and I did not doubt, among the
multiplied resources of the metropolis, to find something which should
suggest to me an eligible mode of disposing of my person and industry. I
reserved Mr. Forester in my arrangement, as a last resource, not to be
called forth unless for immediate protection from the hand of
persecution and power. I was destitute of that experience of the world,
which can alone render us fertile in resources, or enable us to
institute a just comparison between the resources that offer themselves.
I was like the fascinated animal, that is seized with the most terrible
apprehensions, at the same time that he is incapable of adequately
considering for his own safety.

The mode of my proceeding being digested, I traced, with a cheerful
heart, the unfrequented path it was now necessary for me to pursue. The
night was gloomy, and it drizzled with rain. But these were
circumstances I had scarcely the power to perceive; all was sunshine and
joy within me. I hardly felt the ground; I repeated to myself a thousand
times, "I am free. What concern have I with danger and alarm? I feel
that I am free; I feel that I will continue so. What power is able to
hold in chains a mind ardent and determined? What power can cause that
man to die, whose whole soul commands him to continue to live?" I looked
back with abhorrence to the subjection in which I had been held. I did
not hate the author of my misfortunes--truth and justice acquit me of
that; I rather pitied the hard destiny to which he seemed condemned. But
I thought with unspeakable loathing of those errors, in consequence of
which every man is fated to be, more or less, the tyrant or the slave. I
was astonished at the folly of my species, that they did not rise up as
one man, and shake off chains so ignominious, and misery so
insupportable. So far as related to myself, I resolved--and this
resolution has never been entirely forgotten by me--to hold myself
disengaged from this odious scene, and never fill the part either of the
oppressor or the sufferer. My mind continued in this enthusiastical
state, full of confidence, and accessible only to such a portion of fear
as served rather to keep up a state of pleasurable emotion than to
generate anguish and distress, during the whole of this nocturnal
expedition. After a walk of three hours, I arrived, without accident, at
the village from which I hoped to have taken my passage for the
metropolis. At this early hour every thing was quiet; no sound of any
thing human saluted my ear. It was with difficulty that I gained
admittance into the yard of the inn, where I found a single ostler
taking care of some horses. From him I received the unwelcome tidings,
that the coach was not expected till six o'clock in the morning of the
day after to-morrow, its route through that town recurring only three
times a week.

This intelligence gave the first check to the rapturous inebriation by
which my mind had been possessed from the moment I quitted the
habitation of Mr. Falkland. The whole of my fortune in ready cash
consisted of about eleven guineas. I had about fifty more, that had
fallen to me from the disposal of my property at the death of my father;
but that was so vested as to preclude it from immediate use, and I even
doubted whether it would not be found better ultimately to resign it,
than, by claiming it, to risk the furnishing a clew to what I most of
all dreaded, the persecution of Mr. Falkland. There was nothing I so
ardently desired as the annihilation of all future intercourse between
us, that he should not know there was such a person on the earth as
myself, and that I should never more hear the repetition of a name which
had been so fatal to my peace.

Thus circumstanced, I conceived frugality to be an object by no means
unworthy of my attention, unable as I was to prognosticate what
discouragements and delays might present themselves to the
accomplishment of my wishes, after my arrival in London. For this and
other reasons, I determined to adhere to my design of travelling by the
stage; it only remaining for me to consider in what manner I should
prevent the eventful delay of twenty-four hours from becoming, by any
untoward event, a source of new calamity. It was by no means advisable
to remain in the village where I now was during this interval; nor did I
even think proper to employ it, in proceeding on foot along the great
road. I therefore decided upon making a circuit, the direction of which
should seem at first extremely wide of my intended route, and then,
suddenly taking a different inclination, should enable me to arrive by
the close of day at a market-town twelve miles nearer to the metropolis.

Having fixed the economy of the day, and persuaded myself that it was
the best which, under the circumstances, could be adopted, I dismissed,
for the most part, all further anxieties from my mind, and eagerly
yielded myself up to the different amusements that arose. I rested and
went forward at the impulse of the moment. At one time I reclined upon a
bank immersed in contemplation, and at another exerted myself to analyse
the prospects which succeeded each other. The haziness of the morning
was followed by a spirit-stirring and beautiful day. With the ductility
so characteristic of a youthful mind, I forgot the anguish which had
lately been my continual guest, and occupied myself entirely in dreams
of future novelty and felicity. I scarcely ever, in the whole course of
my existence, spent a day of more various or exquisite gratification. It
furnished a strong, and perhaps not an unsalutary contrast, to the
terrors which had preceded, and the dreadful scenes that awaited me.

In the evening I arrived at the place of my destination, and enquired
for the inn at which the coach was accustomed to call. A circumstance
however had previously excited my attention, and reproduced in me a
state of alarm.

Though it was already dark before I reached the town, my observation
had been attracted by a man, who passed me on horseback in the opposite
direction, about half a mile on the other side of the town. There was an
inquisitiveness in his gesture that I did not like; and, as far as I
could discern his figure, I pronounced him an ill-looking man. He had
not passed me more than two minutes before I heard the sound of a horse
advancing slowly behind me. These circumstances impressed some degree of
uneasy sensation upon my mind. I first mended my pace; and, this not
appearing to answer the purpose, I afterwards loitered, that the
horseman might pass me. He did so; and, as I glanced at him, I thought I
saw that it was the same man. He now put his horse into a trot, and
entered the town. I followed; and it was not long before I perceived him
at the door of an alehouse, drinking a mug of beer. This however the
darkness prevented me from discovering, till I was in a manner upon him.
I pushed forward, and saw him no more, till, as I entered the yard of
the inn where I intended to sleep, the same man suddenly rode up to me,
and asked if my name were Williams.

This adventure, _while it had been passing_, expelled the gaiety of my
mind, and filled me with anxiety. The apprehension however that I felt,
appeared to me groundless: if I were pursued, I took it for granted it
would be by some of Mr. Falkland's people, and not by a stranger. The
darkness took from me some of the simplest expedients of precaution. I
determined at least to proceed to the inn, and make the necessary
enquiries.

I no sooner heard the sound of the horse as I entered the yard, and the
question proposed to me by the rider, than the dreadful certainty of
what I feared instantly took possession of my mind. Every incident
connected with my late abhorred situation was calculated to impress me
with the deepest alarm. My first thought was, to betake myself to the
fields, and trust to the swiftness of my flight for safety. But this was
scarcely practicable: I remarked that my enemy was alone; and I believed
that, man to man, I might reasonably hope to get the better of him,
either by the firmness of my determination, or the subtlety of my
invention.

Thus resolved, I replied in an impetuous and peremptory tone, that I was
the man he took me for; adding, "I guess your errand; but it is to no
purpose. You come to conduct me back to Falkland House; but no force
shall ever drag me to that place alive. I have not taken my resolution
without strong reasons; and all the world shall not persuade me to alter
it. I am an Englishman, and it is the privilege of an Englishman to be
sole judge and master of his own actions."

"You are in the devil of a hurry," replied the man, "to guess my
intentions, and tell your own. But your guess is right; and mayhap you
may have reason to be thankful that my errand is not something worse.
Sure enough the squire expects you;--but I have a letter, and when you
have read that, I suppose you will come off a little of your stoutness.
If that does not answer, it will then be time to think what is to be
done next."

Thus saying, he gave me his letter, which was from Mr. Forester, whom,
as he told me, he had left at Mr. Falkland's house. I went into a room
of the inn for the purpose of reading it, and was followed by the
bearer. The letter was as follows:--

WILLIAMS,

"My brother Falkland has sent the bearer in pursuit of you. He expects
that, if found, you will return with him: I expect it too. It is of the
utmost consequence to your future honour and character. After reading
these lines, if you are a villain and a rascal, you will perhaps
endeavour to fly; if your conscience tells you, you are innocent, you
will, out of all doubt, come back. Show me then whether I have been your
dupe: and, while I was won over by your seeming ingenuousness, have
suffered myself to be made the tool of a designing knave. If you come, I
pledge myself that, if you clear your reputation, you shall not only be
free to go wherever you please, but shall receive every assistance in my
power to give. Remember, I engage for nothing further than that.

"VALENTINE FORESTER."

What a letter was this! To a mind like mine, glowing with the love of
virtue, such an address was strong enough to draw the person to whom it
was addressed from one end of the earth to the other. My mind was full
of confidence and energy. I felt my own innocence, and was determined to
assert it. I was willing to be driven out a fugitive; I even rejoiced in
my escape, and cheerfully went out into the world destitute of every
provision, and depending for my future prospects upon my own ingenuity.

Thus much, said I, Falkland! you may do. Dispose of me as you please
with respect to the goods of fortune; but you shall neither make prize
of my liberty, nor sully the whiteness of my name. I repassed in my
thoughts every memorable incident that had happened to me under his
roof. I could recollect nothing, except the affair of the mysterious
trunk, out of which the shadow of a criminal accusation could be
extorted. In that instance my conduct had been highly reprehensible, and
I had never looked back upon it without remorse and self-condemnation.
But I did not believe that it was of the nature of those actions which
can be brought under legal censure. I could still less persuade myself
that Mr. Falkland, who shuddered at the very possibility of detection,
and who considered himself as completely in my power, would dare to
bring forward a subject so closely connected with the internal agony of
his soul. In a word, the more I reflected on the phrases of Mr.
Forester's billet, the less could I imagine the nature of those scenes
to which they were to serve as a prelude.

The inscrutableness however of the mystery they contained, did not
suffice to overwhelm my courage. My mind seemed to undergo an entire
revolution. Timid and embarrassed as I had felt myself, when I regarded
Mr. Falkland as my clandestine and domestic foe, I now conceived that
the case was entirely altered. "Meet me," said I, "as an open accuser:
if we must contend, let us contend in the face of day; and then,
unparalleled as your resources may be, I will not fear you." Innocence
and guilt were, in my apprehension, the things in the whole world the
most opposite to each other. I would not suffer myself to believe, that
the former could be confounded with the latter, unless the innocent man
first allowed himself to be subdued in mind, before he was defrauded of
the good opinion of mankind. Virtue rising superior to every calamity,
defeating by a plain unvarnished tale all the stratagems of Vice, and
throwing back upon her adversary the confusion with which he had hoped
to overwhelm her, was one of the favourite subjects of my youthful
reveries. I determined never to prove an instrument of destruction to
Mr. Falkland; but I was not less resolute to obtain justice to myself.

The issue of all these confident hopes I shall immediately have
occasion to relate. It was thus, with the most generous and undoubting
spirit, that I rushed upon irretrievable ruin.

"Friend," said I to the bearer, after a considerable interval of
silence, "you are right. This is, indeed, an extraordinary letter you
have brought me; but it answers its purpose. I will certainly go with
you now, whatever be the consequence. No person shall ever impute blame
to me, so long as I have it in my power to clear myself."

I felt, in the circumstances in which I was placed by Mr. Forester's
letter, not merely a willingness, but an alacrity and impatience, to
return. We procured a second horse. We proceeded on our journey in
silence. My mind was occupied again in endeavouring to account for Mr.
Forester's letter. I knew the inflexibility and sternness of Mr.
Falkland's mind in accomplishing the purposes he had at heart; but I
also knew that every virtuous and magnanimous principle was congenial to
his character.

When we arrived, midnight was already past, and we were obliged to waken
one of the servants to give us admittance. I found that Mr. Forester had
left a message for me, in consideration of the possibility of my arrival
during the night, directing me immediately to go to bed, and to take
care that I did not come weary and exhausted to the business of the
following day. I endeavoured to take his advice; but my slumbers were
unrefreshing and disturbed. I suffered however no reduction of courage:
the singularity of my situation, my conjectures with respect to the
present, my eagerness for the future, did not allow me to sink into a
languid and inactive state.

Next morning the first person I saw was Mr. Forester. He told me that
he did not yet know what Mr. Falkland had to allege against me, for that
he had refused to know. He had arrived at the house of his brother by
appointment on the preceding day to settle some indispensable business,
his intention having been to depart the moment the business was
finished, as he knew that conduct on his part would be most agreeable to
Mr. Falkland. But he was no sooner come, than he found the whole house
in confusion, the alarm of my elopement having been given a few hours
before. Mr. Falkland had despatched servants in all directions in
pursuit of me; and the servant from the market-town arrived at the same
moment with Mr. Forester, with intelligence that a person answering the
description he gave, had been there very early in the morning enquiring
respecting the stage to London.

Mr. Falkland seemed extremely disturbed at this information, and
exclaimed on me with acrimony, as an unthankful and unnatural villain.

Mr. Forester replied, "Have more command of yourself, sir! Villain is a
serious appellation, and must not be trifled with. Englishmen are free;
and no man is to be charged with villainy, because he changes one source
of subsistence for another."

Mr. Falkland shook his head, and with a smile, expressive of acute
sensibility, said, "Brother, brother, you are the dupe of his art. I
always considered him with an eye of suspicion, and was aware of his
depravity. But I have just discovered--"

"Stop, sir!" interrupted Mr. Forester. "I own I thought that, in a
moment of acrimony, you might be employing harsh epithets in a sort of
random style. But if you have a serious accusation to state, we must not
be told of that, till it is known whether the lad is within reach of a
hearing. I am indifferent myself about the good opinion of others. It is
what the world bestows and retracts with so little thought, that I can
make no account of its decision. But that does not authorise me lightly
to entertain an ill opinion of another. The slenderest allowance I think
I can make to such as I consign to be the example and terror of their
species, is that of being heard in their own defence. It is a wise
principle that requires the judge to come into court uninformed of the
merits of the cause he is to try; and to that principle I am determined
to conform as an individual. I shall always think it right to be severe
and inflexible in my treatment of offenders; but the severity I exercise
in the sequel, must be accompanied with impartiality and caution in what
is preliminary."

While Mr. Forester related to me these particulars, he observed me ready
to break out into some of the expressions which the narrative suggested;
but he would not suffer me to speak. "No," said he; "I would not hear
Mr. Falkland against you; and I cannot hear you in your defence. I come
to you at present to speak, and not to hear. I thought it right to warn
you of your danger, but I have nothing more to do now. Reserve what you
have to say to the proper time. Make the best story you can for
yourself--true, if truth, as I hope, will serve your purpose; but, if
not, the most plausible and ingenious you can invent. That is what
self-defence requires from every man, where, as it always happens to a
man upon his trial, he has the whole world against him, and has his own
battle to fight against the world. Farewell; and God send you a good
deliverance! If Mr. Falkland's accusation, whatever it be, shall appear
premature, depend upon having me more zealously your friend than ever.
If not, this is the last act of friendship you will ever receive from
me!"

It may be believed that this address, so singular, so solemn, so big
with conditional menace, did not greatly tend to encourage me. I was
totally ignorant of the charge to be advanced against me; and not a
little astonished, when it was in my power to be in the most formidable
degree the accuser of Mr. Falkland, to find the principles of equity so
completely reversed, as for the innocent but instructed individual to be
the party accused and suffering, instead of having, as was natural, the
real criminal at his mercy. I was still more astonished at the
superhuman power Mr. Falkland seemed to possess, of bringing the object
of his persecution within the sphere of his authority; a reflection
attended with some check to that eagerness and boldness of spirit, which
now constituted the ruling passion of my mind.

But this was no time for meditation. To the sufferer the course of
events is taken out of his direction, and he is hurried along with an
irresistible force, without finding it within the compass of his efforts
to check their rapidity. I was allowed only a short time to recollect
myself, when my trial commenced. I was conducted to the library, where I
had passed so many happy and so many contemplative hours, and found
there Mr. Forester and three or four of the servants already assembled,
in expectation of me and my accuser. Every thing was calculated to
suggest to me that I must trust only in the justice of the parties
concerned, and had nothing to hope from their indulgence. Mr. Falkland
entered at one door, almost as soon as I entered at the other.




CHAPTER X.


He began: "It has been the principle of my life, never to inflict a
wilful injury upon any thing that lives; I need not express my regret,
when I find myself obliged to be the promulgator of a criminal charge.
How gladly would I pass unnoticed the evil I have sustained; but I owe
it to society to detect an offender, and prevent other men from being
imposed upon, as I have been, by an appearance of integrity."

"It would be better," interrupted Mr. Forester "to speak directly to the
point. We ought not, though unwarily, by apologising for ourselves, to
create at such a time a prejudice against an individual, against whom a
criminal accusation will always be prejudice enough."

"I strongly suspect," continued Mr. Falkland, "this young man, who has
been peculiarly the object of my kindness, of having robbed me to a
considerable amount."

"What," replied Mr. Forester, "are the grounds of your suspicion?"

"The first of them is the actual loss I have sustained, in notes,
jewels, and plate. I have missed bank-notes to the amount of nine
hundred pounds, three gold repeaters of considerable value, a complete
set of diamonds, the property of my late mother, and several other
articles."

"And why," continued my arbitrator, astonishment grief, and a desire to
retain his self-possession, strong contending in his countenance and
voice, "do you fix on this young man as the instrument of the
depredation?"

"I found him, on my coming home, upon the day when every thing was in
disorder from the alarm of fire, in the very act of quitting the private
apartment where these articles were deposited. He was confounded at
seeing me, and hastened to withdraw as soon as he possibly could."

"Did you say nothing to him--take no notice of the confusion your sudden
appearance produced?"

"I asked what was his errand in that place. He was at first so terrified
and overcome, that he could not answer me. Afterwards, with a good deal
of faltering, he said that, when all the servants were engaged in
endeavouring to save the most valuable part of my property, he had come
hither with the same view; but that he had as yet removed nothing."

"Did you immediately examine to see that every thing was safe?"

"No. I was accustomed to confide in his honesty, and I was suddenly
called away, in the present instance, to attend to the increasing
progress of the flames. I therefore only took out the key from the door
of the apartment, having first locked it, and, putting it in my pocket,
hastened to go where my presence seemed indispensably necessary."

"How long was it before you missed your property?"

"The same evening. The hurry of the scene had driven the circumstance
entirely out of my mind, till, going by accident near the apartment, the
whole affair, together with the singular and equivocal behaviour of
Williams, rushed at once upon my recollection. I immediately entered,
examined the trunk in which these things were contained, and, to my
astonishment, found the locks broken, and the property gone."

"What steps did you take upon this discovery?"

"I sent for Williams, and talked to him very seriously upon the
subject. But he had now perfectly recovered his self-command, and calmly
and stoutly denied all knowledge of the matter. I urged him with the
enormousness of the offence, but I made no impression. He did not
discover either the surprise and indignation one would have expected
from a person entirely innocent, or the uneasiness that generally
attends upon guilt. He was rather silent and reserved. I then informed
him, that I should proceed in a manner different from what he might
perhaps expect. I would not, as is too frequent in such cases, make a
general search; for I had rather lose my property for ever without
redress, than expose a multitude of innocent persons to anxiety and
injustice. My suspicion, for the present, unavoidably fixed upon him.
But, in a matter of so great consequence, I was determined not to act
upon suspicion. I would neither incur the possibility of ruining him,
being innocent, nor be the instrument of exposing others to his
depredations, if guilty. I should therefore merely insist upon his
continuing in my service. He might depend upon it he should be well
watched, and I trusted the whole truth would eventually appear. Since he
avoided confession now, I advised him to consider how far it was likely
he would come off with impunity at last. This I determined on, that the
moment he attempted an escape, I would consider that as an indication of
guilt, and proceed accordingly."

"What circumstances have occurred from that time to the present?"

"None upon which I can infer a certainty of guilt; several that agree to
favour a suspicion. From that time Williams was perpetually uneasy in
his situation, always desirous, as it now appears, to escape, but
afraid to adopt such a measure without certain precautions. It was not
long after, that you, Mr. Forester, became my visitor. I observed, with
dissatisfaction, the growing intercourse between you, reflecting on the
equivocalness of his character, and the attempt he would probably make
to render you the dupe of his hypocrisy. I accordingly threatened him
severely; and I believe you observed the change that presently after
occurred in his behaviour with relation to you."

"I did, and it appeared at that time mysterious and extraordinary."

"Some time after, as you well know, a rencounter took place between you,
whether accidental or intentional on his part I am not able to say, when
he confessed to you the uneasiness of his mind, without discovering the
cause, and openly proposed to you to assist him in his flight, and
stand, in case of necessity, between him and my resentment. You offered,
it seems, to take him into your service; but nothing, as he
acknowledged, would answer his purpose, that did not place his retreat
wholly out of my power to discover."

"Did it not appear extraordinary to you, that he should hope for any
effectual protection from me, while it remained perpetually in your
power to satisfy me of his unworthiness?"

"Perhaps he had hopes that I should not proceed to that step, at least
so long as the place of his retreat should be unknown to me, and of
consequence the event of my proceeding dubious. Perhaps he confided in
his own powers, which are far from contemptible, to construct a
plausible tale, especially as he had taken care to have the first
impression in his favour. After all, this protection, on your part, was
merely reserved in case all other expedients failed. He does not appear
to have had any other sentiment upon the subject, than that, if he were
defeated in his projects for placing himself beyond the reach of
justice, it was better to have bespoken a place in your patronage than
to be destitute of every resource."

Mr. Falkland having thus finished his evidence, called upon Robert, the
valet, to confirm the part of it which related to the day of the fire.

Robert stated, that he happened to be coming through the library that
day, a few minutes after Mr. Falkland's being brought home by the sight
of the fire; that he had found me standing there with every mark of
perturbation and fright; that he could not help stopping to notice it;
that he had spoken to me two or three times before he could obtain an
answer; and that all he could get from me at last was, that I was the
most miserable creature alive.

He further said, that in the evening of the same day Mr. Falkland called
him into the private apartment adjoining to the library, and bid him
bring a hammer and some nails. He then showed him a trunk standing in
the apartment with its locks and fastening broken, and ordered him to
observe and remember what he saw, but not to mention it to any one.
Robert did not at that time know what Mr. Falkland intended by these
directions, which were given in a manner uncommonly solemn and
significant; but he entertained no doubt, that the fastenings were
broken and wrenched by the application of a chisel or such-like
instrument, with the intention of forcibly opening the trunk.

Mr. Forester observed upon this evidence, that as much of it as related
to the day of the fire seemed indeed to afford powerful reasons for
suspicion; and that the circumstances that had occurred since strangely
concurred to fortify that suspicion. Meantime, that nothing proper to
be done might be omitted, he asked whether in my flight I had removed my
boxes, to see whether by that means any trace could be discovered to
confirm the imputation. Mr. Falkland treated this suggestion slightly,
saying, that if I were the thief, I had no doubt taken the precaution to
obviate so palpable a means of detection. To this Mr. Forester only
replied, that conjecture, however skilfully formed, was not always
realised in the actions and behaviour of mankind; and ordered that my
boxes and trunks, if found, should be brought into the library. I
listened to this suggestion with pleasure; and, uneasy and confounded as
I was at the appearances combined against me, I trusted in this appeal
to give a new face to my cause. I was eager to declare the place where
my property was deposited; and the servants, guided by my direction,
presently produced what was enquired for.

The two boxes that were first opened, contained nothing to confirm the
accusation against me; in the third were found a watch and several
jewels, that were immediately known to be the property of Mr. Falkland.
The production of this seemingly decisive evidence excited emotions of
astonishment and concern; but no person's astonishment appeared to be
greater than that of Mr. Falkland. That I should have left the stolen
goods behind me, would of itself have appeared incredible; but when it
was considered what a secure place of concealment I had found for them,
the wonder diminished; and Mr. Forester observed, that it was by no
means impossible I might conceive it easier to obtain possession of them
afterwards, than to remove them at the period of my precipitate flight.

Here however I thought it necessary to interfere. I fervently urged my
right to a fair and impartial construction. I asked Mr. Forester,
whether it were probable, if I had stolen these things, that I should
not have contrived, at least to remove them along with me? And again,
whether, if I had been conscious they would he found among my property,
I should myself have indicated the place where I had concealed it?

The insinuation I conveyed against Mr. Forester's impartiality
overspread his whole countenance, for an instant, with the flush of
anger.

"Impartiality, young man! Yes, be sure, from me you shall experience an
impartial treatment! God send that may answer your purpose! Presently
you shall be heard at full in your own defence.

"You expect us to believe you innocent, because you did not remove these
things along with you. The money is removed. Where, sir, is that? We
cannot answer for the inconsistences and oversights of any human mind,
and, least of all, if that mind should appear to be disturbed with the
consciousness of guilt.

"You observe that it was by your own direction these boxes and trunks
have been found: that is indeed extraordinary. It appears little less
than infatuation. But to what purpose appeal to probabilities and
conjecture, in the face of incontestable facts? There, sir, are the
boxes: you alone knew where they were to be found; you alone had the
keys: tell us then how this watch and these jewels came to be contained
in them?"

I was silent.

To the rest of the persons present I seemed to be merely the subject of
detection; but in reality I was, of all the spectators, that individual
who was most at a loss to conceive, through every stage of the scene,
what, would come next, and who listened to every word that was uttered
with the most uncontrollable amazement. Amazement however alternately
yielded to indignation and horror. At first I could not refrain from
repeatedly attempting to interrupt; but I was checked in these attempts
by Mr. Forester; and I presently felt how necessary it was to my future
peace, that I should collect the whole energy of my mind to repel the
charge, and assert my innocence.

Every thing being now produced that could be produced against me, Mr.
Forester turned to me with a look of concern and pity, and told me that
now was the time, if I chose to allege any thing in my defence. In reply
to this invitation, I spoke nearly as follows:--

"I am innocent. It is in vain that circumstances are accumulated against
me; there is not a person upon earth less capable than I of the things
of which I am accused. I appeal to my heart--I appeal to my looks--I
appeal to every sentiment my tongue ever uttered."

I could perceive that the fervour with which I spoke made some
impression upon every one that heard me. But in a moment their eyes were
turned upon the property that lay before them, and their countenances
changed. I proceeded:--

"One thing more I must aver;--Mr. Falkland is not deceived; he perfectly
knows that I am innocent."

I had no sooner uttered these words, than an involuntary cry of
indignation burst from every person in the room. Mr. Forester turned to
me with a look of extreme severity, and said--

"Young man, consider well what you are doing! It is the privilege of the
party accused to say whatever he thinks proper; and I will take care
that you shall enjoy that privilege in its utmost extent. But do you
think it will conduce in any respect to your benefit, to throw out such
insolent and intolerable insinuations?"

"I thank you most sincerely," replied I, "for your caution; but I well
know what it is I am doing. I make this declaration, not merely because
it is solemnly true, but because it is inseparably connected with my
vindication. I am the party accused, and I shall be told that I am not
to be believed in my own defence. I can produce no other witnesses of my
innocence; I therefore call upon Mr. Falkland to be my evidence. I ask
him--

"Did you never boast to me in private of your power to ruin me? Did you
never say that, if once I brought on myself the weight of your
displeasure, my fall should be irreparable? Did you not tell me that,
though I should prepare in that case a tale however plausible or however
true, you would take care that the whole world should execrate me as an
impostor? Were not those your very words? Did you not add, that my
innocence should be of no service to me, and that you laughed at so
feeble a defence? I ask you further,--Did you not receive a letter from
me the morning of the day on which I departed, requesting your consent
to my departure? Should I have done that if my flight had been that of a
thief? I challenge any man to reconcile the expressions of that letter
with this accusation. Should I have begun with stating that I had
conceived a desire to quit your service, if my desire and the reasons
for it, had been of the nature that is now alleged? Should I have dared
to ask for what reason I was thus subjected to an eternal penance?"

Saying this, I took out a copy of my letter, and laid it open upon the
table.

Mr. Falkland returned no immediate answer to my interrogations. Mr.
Forester turned to him, and said.

"Well, sir, what is your reply to this challenge of your servant?"

Mr. Falkland answered, "Such a mode of defence scarcely calls for a
reply. But I answer, I held no such conversation; I never used such
words; I received no such letter. Surely it is no sufficient refutation
of a criminal charge, that the criminal repels what is alleged against
him with volubility of speech, and intrepidity of manner."

Mr. Forester then turned to me: "If," said he, "you trust your
vindication to the plausibility of your tale, you must take care to
render it consistent and complete. You have not told us what was the
cause of the confusion and anxiety in which Robert professes to have
found you, why you were so impatient to quit the service of Mr.
Falkland, or how you account for certain articles of his property being
found in your possession."

"All that, sir," answered I, "is true. There are certain parts of my
story that I have not told. If they were told, they would not conduce to
my disadvantage, and they would make the present accusation appear still
more astonishing. But I cannot, as yet at least, prevail upon myself to
tell them. Is it necessary to give any particular and precise reasons
why I should wish to change the place of my residence? You all of you
know the unfortunate state of Mr. Falkland's mind. You know the
sternness, reservedness, and distance of his manners. If I had no other
reasons, surely it would afford small presumption of criminality that I
should wish to change his service for another.

"The question of how these articles of Mr. Falkland's property came to
be found in my possession, is more material. It is a question I am
wholly unable to answer. Their being found there, was at least as
unexpected to me as to any one of the persons now present. I only know
that, as I have the most perfect assurance of Mr. Falkland's being
conscious of my innocence--for, observe! I do not shrink from that
assertion; I reiterate it with new confidence--I therefore firmly and
from my soul believe, that their being there is of Mr. Falkland's
contrivance."

I no sooner said this, than I was again interrupted by an involuntary
exclamation from every one present. They looked at me with furious
glances, as if they could have torn me to pieces. I proceeded:--

"I have now answered every thing that is alleged against me.

"Mr. Forester, you are a lover of justice; I conjure you not to violate
it in my person. You are a man of penetration; look at me! do you see
any of the marks of guilt? Recollect all that has ever passed under your
observation; is it compatible with a mind capable of what is now alleged
against me? Could a real criminal have shown himself so unabashed,
composed, and firm as I have now done?

"Fellow-servants! Mr. Falkland is a man of rank and fortune; he is your
master. I am a poor country lad, without a friend in the world. That is
a ground of real difference to a certain extent; but it is not a
sufficient ground for the subversion of justice. Remember, that I am in
a situation that is not to be trifled with; that a decision given
against me now, in a case in which I solemnly assure you I am innocent,
will for ever deprive me of reputation and peace of mind, combine the
whole world in a league against me, and determine perhaps upon my
liberty and my life. If you believe--if you see--if you know, that I am
innocent, speak for me. Do not suffer a pusillanimous timidity to
prevent you from saving a fellow-creature from destruction, who does not
deserve to have a human being for his enemy. Why have we the power of
speech, but to communicate our thoughts? I will never believe that a
man, conscious of innocence, cannot make other men perceive that he has
that thought. Do not you feel that my whole heart tells me. I am not
guilty of what is imputed to me?

"To you, Mr. Falkland, I have nothing to say: I know you, and know that
you are impenetrable. At the very moment that you are urging such odious
charges against me, you admire my resolution and forbearance. But I have
nothing to hope from you. You can look upon my ruin without pity or
remorse. I am most unfortunate indeed in having to do with such an
adversary. You oblige me to say ill things of you; but I appeal to your
own heart, whether my language is that of exaggeration or revenge."

Every thing that could be alleged on either side being now concluded,
Mr. Forester undertook to make some remarks upon the whole.

"Williams," said he, "the charge against you is heavy; the direct
evidence strong; the corroborating circumstances numerous and striking.
I grant that you have shown considerable dexterity in your answers; but
you will learn, young man, to your cost, that dexterity, however
powerful it may be in certain cases, will avail little against the
stubbornness of truth. It is fortunate for mankind that the empire of
talents has its limitations, and that it is not in the power of
ingenuity to subvert the distinctions of right and wrong. Take my word
for it, that the true merits of the case against you will be too strong
for sophistry to overturn; that justice will prevail, and impotent
malice be defeated.

"To you, Mr. Falkland, society is obliged for having placed this black
affair in its true light. Do not suffer the malignant aspersions of the
criminal to give you uneasiness. Depend upon it that they will be found
of no weight I have no doubt that your character, in the judgment of
every person that has heard them, stands higher than ever. We feel for
your misfortune, in being obliged to hear such calumnies from a person
who has injured you so grossly. But you must be considered in that
respect as a martyr in the public cause. The purity of your motives and
dispositions is beyond the reach of malice; and truth and equity will
not fail to award, to your calumniator infamy, and to you the love and
approbation of mankind.

"I have now told you, Williams, what I think of your case. But I have no
right to assume to be your ultimate judge. Desperate as it appears to
me, I will give you one piece of advice, as if I were retained as a
counsel to assist you. Leave out of it whatever tends to the
disadvantage of Mr. Falkland. Defend yourself as well as you can, but do
not attack your master. It is your business to create in those who hear
you a prepossession in your favour. But the recrimination you have been
now practising, will always create indignation. Dishonesty will admit of
some palliation. The deliberate malice you have now been showing is a
thousand times more atrocious. It proves you to have the mind of a
demon, rather than of a felon. Wherever you shall repeat it, those who
hear you will pronounce you guilty upon that, even if the proper
evidence against you were glaringly defective. If therefore you would
consult your interest, which seems to be your only consideration, it is
incumbent upon you by all means immediately to retract that. If you
desire to be believed honest, you must in the first place show that you
have a due sense of merit in others. You cannot better serve your cause
than by begging pardon of your master, and doing homage to rectitude and
worth, even when they are employed in vengeance against you."

It is easy to conceive that my mind sustained an extreme shock from the
decision of Mr. Forester; but his call upon me to retract and humble
myself before my accuser penetrated my whole soul with indignation. I
answered:--

"I have already told you I am innocent. I believe that I could not
endure the effort of inventing a plausible defence, if it were
otherwise. You have just affirmed that it is not in the power of
ingenuity to subvert the distinctions of right and wrong, and in that
very instant I find them subverted. This is indeed to me a very awful
moment. New to the world, I know nothing of its affairs but what has
reached me by rumour, or is recorded in books. I have come into it with
all the ardour and confidence inseparable from my years. In every
fellow-being I expected to find a friend. I am unpractised in its wiles,
and have even no acquaintance with its injustice. I have done nothing to
deserve the animosity of mankind; but, if I may judge from the present
scene, I am henceforth to be deprived of the benefits of integrity and
honour. I am to forfeit the friendship of every one I have hitherto
known, and to be precluded from the power of acquiring that of others. I
must therefore be reduced to derive my satisfaction from myself. Depend
upon it, I will not begin that career by dishonourable concessions. If I
am to despair of the good-will of other men, I will at least maintain
the independence of my own mind. Mr. Falkland is my implacable enemy.
Whatever may be his merits in other respects, he is acting towards me
without humanity, without remorse, and without principle. Do you think I
will ever make submissions to a man by whom I am thus treated, that I
will fall down at the feet of one who is to me a devil, or kiss the hand
that is red with my blood?"

"In that respect," answered Mr. Forester, "do as you shall think
proper. I must confess that your firmness and consistency astonish me.
They add something to what I had conceived of human powers. Perhaps you
have chosen the part which, all things considered, may serve your
purpose best; though I think more moderation would be more conciliating.
The exterior of innocence will, I grant, stagger the persons who may
have the direction of your fate, but it will never be able to prevail
against plain and incontrovertible facts. But I have done with you. I
see in you a new instance of that abuse which is so generally made of
talents, the admiration of an undiscerning public. I regard you with
horror. All that remains is, that I should discharge my duty, in
consigning you, as a monster of depravity, to the justice of your
country."

"No," rejoined Mr. Falkland, "to that I can never consent. I have put a
restraint upon myself thus far, because it was right that evidence and
enquiry should take their course. I have suppressed all my habits and
sentiments, because it seemed due to the public that hypocrisy should be
unmasked. But I can suffer this violence no longer. I have through my
whole life interfered to protect, not overbear, the sufferer; and I must
do so now. I feel not the smallest resentment of his impotent attacks
upon my character; I smile at their malice; and they make no diminution
in my benevolence to their author. Let him say what he pleases; he
cannot hurt me. It was proper that he should be brought to public shame,
that other people might not be deceived by him as we have been. But
there is no necessity for proceeding further; and I must insist upon it
that he be permitted to depart wherever he pleases. I am sorry that
public interest affords so gloomy a prospect for his future happiness."

"Mr. Falkland," answered Mr. Forester, "these sentiments do honour to
your humanity; but I must not give way to them. They only serve to set
in a stronger light the venom of this serpent, this monster of
ingratitude, who first robs his benefactor, and then reviles him. Wretch
that you are, will nothing move you? Are you inaccessible to remorse?
Are you not struck to the heart with the unmerited goodness of your
master? Vile calumniator! you are the abhorrence of nature, the
opprobrium of the human species, and the earth can only be freed from an
insupportable burthen by your being exterminated! Recollect, sir, that
this monster, at the very moment that you are exercising such unexampled
forbearance in his behalf, has the presumption to charge you with
prosecuting a crime of which you know him to be innocent, nay, with
having conveyed the pretended stolen goods among his property, for the
express purpose of ruining him. By this unexampled villainy, he makes it
your duty to free the world from such a pest, and your interest to admit
no relaxing in your pursuit of him, lest the world should be persuaded
by your clemency to credit his vile insinuations."

"I care not for the consequences," replied Mr. Falkland; "I will obey
the dictates of my own mind. I will never lend my assistance to the
reforming mankind by axes and gibbets. I am sure things will never be as
they ought, till honour, and not law, be the dictator of mankind, till
vice be taught to shrink before the resistless might of inborn dignity,
and not before the cold formality of statutes. If my calumniator were
worthy of my resentment, I would chastise him with my own sword, and not
that of the magistrate; but in the present case I smile at his malice,
and resolve to spare him, as the generous lord of the forest spares the
insect that would disturb his repose."

"The language you now hold," said Mr. Forester, "is that of romance, and
not of reason. Yet I cannot but be struck with the contrast exhibited
before me, of the magnanimity of virtue, and the obstinate impenetrable
injustice of guilt. While your mind overflows with goodness, nothing can
touch the heart of this thrice-refined villain. I shall never forgive
myself for having once been entrapped by his detestable arts. This is no
time for us to settle the question between chivalry and law. I shall
therefore simply insist as a magistrate, having taken the evidence in
this felony, upon my right and duty of following the course of justice,
and committing the accused to the county jail."

After some further contest Mr. Falkland, finding Mr. Forester obstinate
and impracticable, withdrew his opposition. Accordingly a proper officer
was summoned from the neighbouring village, a mittimus made out, and one
of Mr. Falkland's carriages prepared to conduct me to the place of
custody. It will easily be imagined that this sudden reverse was very
painfully felt by me. I looked round on the servants who had been the
spectators of my examination, but not one of them, either by word or
gesture, expressed compassion for my calamity. The robbery of which I
was accused appeared to them atrocious from its magnitude; and whatever
sparks of compassion might otherwise have sprung up in their ingenuous
and undisciplined minds, were totally obliterated by indignation at my
supposed profligacy in recriminating upon their worthy and excellent
master. My fate being already determined, and one of the servants
despatched for the officer, Mr. Forester and Mr. Falkland withdrew, and
left me in the custody of two others.

One of these was the son of a farmer at no great distance, who had been
in habits of long-established intimacy with my late father. I was
willing accurately to discover the state of mind of those who had been
witnesses of this scene, and who had had some previous opportunity of
observing my character and manners. I, therefore, endeavoured to open a
conversation with him. "Well, my good Thomas," said I, in a querulous
tone, and with a hesitating manner, "am I not a most miserable
creature?"

"Do not speak to me, Master Williams! You have given me a shock that I
shall not get the better of for one while. You were hatched by a hen, as
the saying is, but you came of the spawn of a cockatrice. I am glad to
my heart that honest farmer Williams is dead; your villainy would else
have made him curse the day that ever he was born."

"Thomas, I am innocent! I swear by the great God that shall judge me
another day, I am innocent!"

"Pray, do not swear! for goodness' sake, do not swear! your poor soul is
damned enough without that. For your sake, lad, I will never take any
body's word, nor trust to appearances, tho' it should be an angel. Lord
bless us! how smoothly you palavered it over, for all the world, as if
you had been as fair as a new-born babe! But it will not do; you will
never be able to persuade people that black is white. For my own part, I
have done with you. I loved you yesterday, all one as if you had been my
own brother. To-day I love you so well, that I would go ten miles with
all the pleasure in life to see you hanged."

"Good God, Thomas! have you the heart? What a change! I call God to
witness, I have done nothing to deserve it! What a world do we live in!"

"Hold your tongue, boy! It makes my very heart sick to hear you! I
would not lie a night under the same roof with you for all the world! I
should expect the house to fall and crush such wickedness! I admire that
the earth does not open and swallow you alive! It is poison so much as
to look at you! If you go on at this hardened rate, I believe from my
soul that the people you talk to will tear you to pieces, and you will
never live to come to the gallows. Oh, yes, you do well to pity
yourself; poor tender thing! that spit venom all round you like a toad,
and leave the very ground upon which you crawl infected with your
slime."

Finding the person with whom I talked thus impenetrable to all I could
say, and considering that the advantage to be gained was small, even if
I could overcome his prepossession, I took his advice, and was silent.
It was not much longer before every thing was prepared for my departure,
and I was conducted to the same prison which had so lately enclosed the
wretched and innocent Hawkinses. They too had been the victims of Mr.
Falkland. He exhibited, upon a contracted scale indeed, but in which the
truth of delineation was faithfully sustained, a copy of what monarchs
are, who reckon among the instruments of their power prisons of state.




CHAPTER XI.


For my own part, I had never seen a prison, and, like the majority of my
brethren, had given myself little concern to enquire what was the
condition of those who committed offence against, or became obnoxious to
suspicion from, the community. Oh, how enviable is the most tottering
shed under which the labourer retires to rest, compared with the
residence of these walls!

To me every thing was new,--the massy doors, the resounding locks, the
gloomy passages, the grated windows, and the characteristic looks of the
keepers, accustomed to reject every petition, and to steel their hearts
against feeling and pity. Curiosity, and a sense of my situation,
induced me to fix my eyes on the faces of these men; but in a few
minutes I drew them away with unconquerable loathing. It is impossible
to describe the sort of squalidness and filth with which these mansions
are distinguished. I have seen dirty faces in dirty apartments, which
have nevertheless borne the impression of health, and spoke carelessness
and levity rather than distress. But the dirt of a prison speaks sadness
to the heart, and appears to be already in a state of putridity and
infection.

I was detained for more than an hour in the apartment of the keeper, one
turnkey after another coming in, that they might make themselves
familiar with my person. As I was already considered as guilty of felony
to a considerable amount, I underwent a rigorous search, and they took
from me a penknife, a pair of scissars, and that part of my money which
was in gold. It was debated whether or not these should be sealed up, to
be returned to me, as they said, as soon as I should be acquitted; and
had I not displayed an unexpected firmness of manner and vigour of
expostulation, such was probably the conduct that would have been
pursued. Having undergone these ceremonies, I was thrust into a
day-room, in which all the persons then under confinement for felony
were assembled, to the number of eleven. Each of them was too much
engaged in his own reflections, to take notice of me. Of these, two were
imprisoned for horse-stealing, and three for having stolen a sheep, one
for shop-lifting, one for coining, two for highway-robbery, and two for
burglary.

The horse-stealers were engaged in a game at cards, which was presently
interrupted by a difference of opinion, attended with great
vociferation,--they calling upon one and another to decide it, to no
purpose; one paying no attention to their summons, and another leaving
them in the midst of their story, being no longer able to endure his own
internal anguish, in the midst of their mummery.

It is a custom among thieves to constitute a sort of mock tribunal of
their own body, from whose decision every one is informed whether he
shall be acquitted, respited, or pardoned, as well as respecting the
supposed most skilful way of conducting his defence. One of the
housebreakers, who had already passed this ordeal, and was stalking up
and down the room with a forced bravery, exclaimed to his companion,
that he was as rich as the Duke of Bedford himself. He had five guineas
and a half, which was as much as he could possibly spend in the course
of the ensuing month; and what happened after that, it was Jack Ketch's
business to see to, not his. As he uttered these words, he threw himself
abruptly upon a bench that was near him, and seemed to be asleep in a
moment. But his sleep was uneasy and disturbed, his breathing was hard,
and, at intervals, had rather the nature of a groan. A young fellow from
the other side of the room came softly to the place where he lay, with a
large knife in his hand: and pressed the back of it with such violence
upon his neck, the head hanging over the side of the bench, that it was
not till after several efforts that he was able to rise. "Oh, Jack!"
cried this manual jester, "I had almost done your business for you!" The
other expressed no marks of resentment, but sullenly answered, "Damn
you, why did not you take the edge? It would have been the best thing
you have done this many a day!"[B]

[Footnote B: An incident exactly similar to this was witnessed by a
friend of the author, a few years since, in a visit to the prison of
Newgate.]

The case of one of the persons committed for highway-robbery was not a
little extraordinary. He was a common soldier of a most engaging
physiognomy, and two-and-twenty years of age. The prosecutor, who had
been robbed one evening, as he returned late from the alehouse, of the
sum of three shillings, swore positively to his person. The character of
the prisoner was such as has seldom been equalled. He had been ardent in
the pursuit of intellectual cultivation, and was accustomed to draw his
favourite amusement from the works of Virgil and Horace. The humbleness
of his situation, combined with his ardour for literature, only served
to give an inexpressible heightening to the interestingness of his
character. He was plain and unaffected; he assumed nothing; he was
capable, when occasion demanded, of firmness, but, in his ordinary
deportment, he seemed unarmed and unresisting, unsuspicious of guile in
others, as he was totally free from guile in himself. His integrity was
proverbially great. In one instance he had been intrusted by a lady to
convey a sum of a thousand pounds to a person at some miles distance: in
another, he was employed by a gentleman, during his absence, in the care
of his house and furniture, to the value of at least five times that
sum. His habits of thinking were strictly his own, full of justice,
simplicity, and wisdom. He from time to time earned money of his
officers, by his peculiar excellence in furbishing arms; but he declined
offers that had been made him to become a Serjeant or a corporal,
saying that he did not want money, and that in a new situation he should
have less leisure for study. He was equally constant in refusing
presents that were offered him by persons who had been struck with his
merit; not that he was under the influence of false delicacy and pride,
but that he had no inclination to accept that, the want of which he did
not feel to be an evil. This man died while I was in prison. I received
his last breath.[C]

[Footnote C: A story extremely similar to this is to be found in the
Newgate Calendar, vol. i. p. 382.]

The whole day I was obliged to spend in the company of these men, some
of them having really committed the actions laid to their charge, others
whom their ill fortune had rendered the victims of suspicion. The whole
was a scene of misery, such as nothing short of actual observation can
suggest to the mind. Some were noisy and obstreperous, endeavouring by a
false bravery to keep at bay the remembrance of their condition; while
others, incapable even of this effort, had the torment of their thoughts
aggravated by the perpetual noise and confusion that prevailed around
them. In the faces of those who assumed the most courage, you might
trace the furrows of anxious care and in the midst of their laboured
hilarity dreadful ideas would ever and anon intrude, convulsing their
features, and working every line into an expression of the keenest
agony. To these men the sun brought no return of joy. Day after day
rolled on, but their state was immutable. Existence was to them a scene
of invariable melancholy; every moment was a moment of anguish; yet did
they wish to prolong that moment, fearful that the coming period would
bring a severer fate. They thought of the past with insupportable
repentance, each man contented to give his right hand to have again the
choice of that peace and liberty, which he had unthinkingly bartered
away. We talk of instruments of torture; Englishmen take credit to
themselves for having banished the use of them from their happy shore!
Alas! he that has observed the secrets of a prison, well knows that
there is more torture in the lingering existence of a criminal, in the
silent intolerable minutes that he spends, than in the tangible misery
of whips and racks!

Such were our days. At sunset our jailors appeared, and ordered each man
to come away, and be locked into his dungeon. It was a bitter
aggravation of our fate, to be under the arbitrary control of these
fellows. They felt no man's sorrow; they were of all men least capable
of any sort of feeling. They had a barbarous and sullen pleasure in
issuing their detested mandates, and observing the mournful reluctance
with which they were obeyed. Whatever they directed, it was in vain to
expostulate; fetters, and bread and water, were the sure consequences of
resistance. Their tyranny had no other limit than their own caprice. To
whom shall the unfortunate felon appeal? To what purpose complain, when
his complaints are sure to be received with incredulity? A tale of
mutiny and necessary precaution is the unfailing refuge of the keeper,
and this tale is an everlasting bar against redress.

Our dungeons were cells, 7-1/2 feet by 6-1/2, below the surface of the
ground, damp, without window, light, or air, except from a few holes
worked for that purpose in the door. In some of these miserable
receptacles three persons were put to sleep together.[D] I was fortunate
enough to have one to myself. It was now the approach of winter. We
were not allowed to have candles, and, as I have already said, were
thrust in here at sunset, and not liberated till the returning day. This
was our situation for fourteen or fifteen hours out of the
four-and-twenty. I had never been accustomed to sleep more than six or
seven hours, and my inclination to sleep was now less than ever. Thus
was I reduced to spend half my day in this dreary abode, and in complete
darkness. This was no trifling aggravation of my lot.

[Footnote D: See Howard on Prisons.]

Among my melancholy reflections I tasked my memory, and counted over the
doors, the locks, the bolts, the chains, the massy walls, and grated
windows, that were between me and liberty. "These," said I, "are the
engines that tyranny sits down in cold and serious meditation to invent.
This is the empire that man exercises over man. Thus is a being, formed
to expatiate, to act, to smile, and enjoy, restricted and benumbed. How
great must be his depravity or heedlessness, who vindicates this scheme
for changing health and gaiety and serenity, into the wanness of a
dungeon, and the deep furrows of agony and despair!"

"Thank God," exclaims the Englishman, "we have no Bastile! Thank God,
with us no man can be punished without a crime!" Unthinking wretch! Is
that a country of liberty, where thousands languish in dungeons and
fetters? Go, go, ignorant fool! and visit the scenes of our prisons!
witness their unwholesomeness, their filth, the tyranny of their
governors, the misery of their inmates! After that, show me the man
shameless enough to triumph, and say, England has no Bastile! Is there
any charge so frivolous, upon which men are not consigned to those
detested abodes? Is there any villainy that is not practised by justices
and prosecutors? But against all this perhaps you have been told there
is redress. Yes; a redress, that it is the consummation of insult so
much as to name! Where shall the poor wretch reduced to the last
despair, to whom acquittal perhaps comes just time enough to save him
from perishing,--where shall this man find leisure, and much less money,
to fee counsel and officers, and purchase the tedious dear-bought remedy
of the law? No; he is too happy to leave his dungeon, and the memory of
his dungeon, behind him; and the same tyranny and wanton oppression
become the inheritance of his successor.

For myself, I looked round upon my walls, and forward upon the premature
death I had too much reason to expect: I consulted my own heart, that
whispered nothing but innocence; and I said, "This is society. This is
the object, the distribution of justice, which is the end of human
reason. For this sages have toiled, and midnight oil has been wasted.
This!"

The reader will forgive this digression from the immediate subject of my
story. If it should be said these are general remarks, let it be
remembered that they are the dear-bought, result of experience. It is
from the fulness of a bursting heart that reproach thus flows to my pen.
These are not the declamations of a man desirous to be eloquent. I have
felt the iron of slavery grating upon my soul.

I believed that misery, more pure than that which I now endured, had
never fallen to the lot of a human being. I recollected with
astonishment my puerile eagerness to be brought to the test, and have my
innocence examined. I execrated it, as the vilest and most insufferable
pedantry. I exclaimed, in the bitterness of my heart, "Of what value is
a fair fame? It is the jewel of men formed to be amused with baubles.
Without it, I might have had serenity of heart and cheerfulness of
occupation, peace, and liberty; why should I consign my happiness to
other men's arbitration? But, if a fair fame were of the most
inexpressible value, is this the method which common sense would
prescribe to retrieve it? The language which these institutions hold out
to the unfortunate is, 'Come, and be shut out from the light of day; be
the associate of those whom society has marked out for her abhorrence,
be the slave of jailers, be loaded with fetters; thus shall you be
cleared from every unworthy aspersion, and restored to reputation and
honour!' This is the consolation she affords to those whom malignity or
folly, private pique or unfounded positiveness, have, without the
smallest foundation, loaded with calumny." For myself, I felt my own
innocence; and I soon found, upon enquiry, that three fourths of those
who are regularly subjected to a similar treatment, are persons whom,
even with all the superciliousness and precipitation of our courts of
justice, no evidence can be found sufficient to convict. How slender
then must be that man's portion of information and discernment, who is
willing to commit his character and welfare to such guardianship!

But my case was even worse than this. I intimately felt that a trial,
such as our institutions have hitherto been able to make it, is only the
worthy sequel of such a beginning. What chance was there after the
purgation I was now suffering, that I should come out acquitted at last?
What probability was there that the trial I had endured in the house of
Mr. Falkland was not just as fair as any that might be expected to
follow? No; I anticipated my own condemnation.

Thus was I cut off, for ever, from all that existence has to
bestow--from all the high hopes I had so often conceived--from all the
future excellence my soul so much delighted to imagine,--to spend a few
weeks in a miserable prison, and then to perish by the hand of the
public executioner. No language can do justice to the indignant and
soul-sickening loathing that these ideas excited. My resentment was not
restricted to my prosecutor, but extended itself to the whole machine of
society. I could never believe that all this was the fair result of
institutions inseparable from the general good. I regarded the whole
human species as so many hangmen and torturers; I considered them as
confederated to tear me to pieces; and this wide scene of inexorable
persecution inflicted upon me inexpressible agony. I looked on this side
and on that: I was innocent; I had a right to expect assistance; but
every heart was steeled against me; every hand was ready to lend its
force to make my ruin secure. No man that has not felt, in his own most
momentous concerns, justice, eternal truth, unalterable equity engaged
in his behalf, and on the other side brute force, impenetrable
obstinacy, and unfeeling insolence, can imagine the sensations that then
passed through my mind. I saw treachery triumphant and enthroned; I saw
the sinews of innocence crumbled into dust by the gripe of almighty
guilt.

What relief had I from these sensations? Was it relief, that I spent the
day in the midst of profligacy and execrations--that I saw reflected
from every countenance agonies only inferior to my own? He that would
form a lively idea of the regions of the damned, need only to witness,
for six hours, a scene to which I was confined for many months. Not for
one hour could I withdraw myself from this complexity of horrors, or
take refuge in the calmness of meditation. Air, exercise, series,
contrast, those grand enliveners of the human frame, I was for ever
debarred from, by the inexorable tyranny under which I was fallen. Nor
did I find the solitude of my nightly dungeon less insupportable. Its
only furniture was the straw that served me for my repose. It was
narrow, damp, and unwholesome. The slumbers of a mind, wearied, like
mine, with the most detestable uniformity, to whom neither amusement nor
occupation ever offered themselves to beguile the painful hours, were
short, disturbed, and unrefreshing. My sleeping, still more than my
waking thoughts, were full of perplexity, deformity, and disorder. To
these slumbers succeeded the hours which, by the regulations of our
prison, I was obliged, though awake, to spend in solitary and cheerless
darkness. Here I had neither books nor pens, nor any thing upon which to
engage my attention; all was a sightless blank. How was a mind, active
and indefatigable like mine, to endure this misery? I could not sink it
in lethargy; I could nor forget my woes: they haunted me with
unintermitted and demoniac malice. Cruel, inexorable policy of human
affairs, that condemns a man to torture like this; that sanctions it,
and knows not what is done under its sanction; that is too supine and
unfeeling to enquire into these petty details; that calls this the
ordeal of innocence, and the protector of freedom! A thousand times I
could have dashed my brains against the walls of my dungeon; a thousand
times I longed for death, and wished, with inexpressible ardour, for an
end to what I suffered; a thousand times I meditated suicide, and
ruminated, in the bitterness of my soul, upon the different means of
escaping from the load of existence. What had I to do with life? I had
seen enough to make me regard it with detestation. Why should I wait the
lingering process of legal despotism, and not dare so much as to die,
but when and how its instruments decreed? Still some inexplicable
suggestion withheld my hand. I clung with desperate fondness to this
shadow of existence, its mysterious attractions, and its hopeless
prospects.




CHAPTER XII.


Such were the reflections that haunted the first days of my
imprisonment, in consequence of which they were spent in perpetual
anguish. But, after a time, nature, wearied with distress, would no
longer stoop to the burthen; thought, which is incessantly varying,
introduced a series of reflections totally different.

My fortitude revived. I had always been accustomed to cheerfulness, good
humour, and serenity; and this habit now returned to visit me at the
bottom of my dungeon. No sooner did my contemplations take this turn,
than I saw the reasonableness and possibility of tranquillity and peace;
and my mind whispered to me the propriety of showing, in this forlorn
condition, that I was superior to all my persecutors. Blessed state of
innocence and self-approbation! The sunshine of conscious integrity
pierced through all the barriers of my cell, and spoke ten thousand
times more joy to my heart, than the accumulated splendours of nature
and art can communicate to the slaves of vice.

I found out the secret of employing my mind. I said, "I am shut up for
half the day in total darkness, without any external source of
amusement; the other half I spend in the midst of noise, turbulence,
and, confusion. What then? Can I not draw amusement from the stores of
my own mind? Is it not freighted with various knowledge? Have I not been
employed from my infancy in gratifying an insatiable curiosity? When
should I derive benefit from these superior advantages, if not at
present?" Accordingly I tasked the stores of my memory, and my powers of
invention. I amused myself with recollecting the history of my life. By
degrees I called to mind a number of minute circumstances, which, but
for this exercise, would have been for ever forgotten. I repassed in my
thoughts whole conversations, I recollected their subjects, their
arrangement, their incidents, frequently their very words. I mused upon
these ideas, till I was totally absorbed in thought. I repeated them,
till my mind glowed with enthusiasm. I had my different employments,
fitted for the solitude of the night, in which I could give full scope
to the impulses of my mind; and for the uproar of the day, in which my
chief object was, to be insensible to the disorder with which I was
surrounded.

By degrees I quitted my own story, and employed myself in imaginary
adventures. I figured to myself every situation in which I could be
placed, and conceived the conduct to be observed in each. Thus scenes of
insult and danger, of tenderness and oppression, became familiar to me.
In fancy I often passed the awful hour of dissolving nature. In some of
my reveries I boiled with impetuous indignation, and in others patiently
collected the whole force of my mind for some fearful encounter. I
cultivated the powers of oratory suited to these different states, and
improved more in eloquence in the solitude of my dungeon, than perhaps I
should have done in the busiest and most crowded scenes.

At length I proceeded to as regular a disposition of my time, as the man
in his study, who passes from mathematics to poetry, and from poetry to
the law of nations, in the different parts of each single day; and I as
seldom infringed upon my plan. Nor were my subjects of disquisition less
numerous than his. I went over, by the assistance of memory only, a
considerable part of Euclid during my confinement, and revived, day
after day, the series of facts and incidents in some of the most
celebrated historians. I became myself a poet; and, while I described
the sentiments cherished by the view of natural objects, recorded the
characters and passions of men, and partook with a burning zeal in the
generosity of their determinations, I eluded the squalid solitude of my
dungeon, and wandered in idea through all the varieties of human
society. I easily found expedients, such as the mind seems always to
require, and which books and pens supply to the man at large, to record
from time to time the progress that had been made.

While I was thus employed, I reflected with exultation upon the degree
in which man is independent of the smiles and frowns of fortune. I was
beyond her reach, for I could fall no lower. To an ordinary eye I might
seem destitute and miserable, but in reality I wanted for nothing. My
fare was coarse; but I was in health. My dungeon was noisome; but I felt
no inconvenience. I was shut up from the usual means of exercise and
air; but I found the method of exercising myself even to perspiration in
my dungeon. I had no power of withdrawing my person from a disgustful
society, in the most cheerful and valuable part of the day; but I soon
brought to perfection the art of withdrawing my thoughts, and saw and
heard the people about me, for just as short a time, and as seldom, as I
pleased.

Such is man in himself considered; so simple his nature; so few his
wants. How different from the man of artificial society! Palaces are
built for his reception, a thousand vehicles provided for his exercise,
provinces are ransacked for the gratification of his appetite, and the
whole world traversed to supply him with apparel and furniture. Thus
vast is his expenditure, and the purchase slavery. He is dependent on a
thousand accidents for tranquillity and health, and his body and soul
are at the devotion of whoever will satisfy his imperious cravings.

In addition to the disadvantages of my present situation, I was reserved
for an ignominious death. What then? Every man must die. No man knows
how soon. It surely is not worse to encounter the king of terrors, in
health, and with every advantage for the collection of fortitude, than
to encounter him, already half subdued by sickness and suffering. I was
resolved at least fully to possess the days I had to live; and this is
peculiarly in the power of the man who preserves his health to the last
moment of his existence. Why should I suffer my mind to be invaded by
unavailing regrets? Every sentiment of vanity, or rather of independence
and justice within me, instigated me to say to my persecutor, "You may
cut off my existence, but you cannot disturb my serenity."




CHAPTER XIII.


In the midst of these reflections, another thought, which had not before
struck me, occurred to my mind. "I exult," said I, "and reasonably, over
the impotence of my persecutor. Is not that impotence greater than I
have yet imagined? I say, he may cut off my existence, but cannot
disturb my serenity. It is true: my mind, the clearness of my spirit,
the firmness of my temper, are beyond his reach; is not my life equally
so, if I please? What are the material obstacles, that man never
subdued? What is the undertaking so arduous, that by some has not been
accomplished? And if by others, why not by me? Had they stronger motives
than I? Was existence more variously endeared to them? or had they more
numerous methods by which to animate and adorn it? Many of those who
have exerted most perseverance and intrepidity, were obviously my
inferiors in that respect. Why should not I be as daring as they?
Adamant and steel have a ductility like water, to a mind sufficiently
bold and contemplative. The mind is master of itself; and is endowed
with powers that might enable it to laugh at the tyrant's vigilance." I
passed and repassed these ideas in my mind; and, heated with the
contemplation, I said, "No, I will not die!"

My reading, in early youth, had been extremely miscellaneous. I had read
of housebreakers, to whom locks and bolts were a jest, and who, vain of
their art, exhibited the experiment of entering a house the most
strongly barricaded, with as little noise, and almost as little trouble,
as other men would lift up a latch. There is nothing so interesting to
the juvenile mind, as the wonderful; there is no power that it so
eagerly covets, as that of astonishing spectators by its miraculous
exertions. Mind appeared, to my untutored reflections, vague, airy, and
unfettered, the susceptible perceiver of reasons, but never intended by
nature to be the slave of force. Why should it be in the power of man to
overtake and hold me by violence? Why, when I choose to withdraw myself,
should I not be capable of eluding the most vigilant search? These
limbs, and this trunk, are a cumbrous and unfortunate load for the power
of thinking to drag along with it; but why should not the power of
thinking be able to lighten the load, till it shall be no longer
felt?--These early modes of reflection were by no means indifferent to
my present enquiries.

Our next-door neighbour at my father's house had been a carpenter. Fresh
from the sort of reading I have mentioned, I was eager to examine his
tools, their powers and their uses. This carpenter was a man of strong
and vigorous mind; and, his faculties having been chiefly confined to
the range of his profession, he was fertile in experiments, and
ingenious in reasoning upon these particular topics. I therefore
obtained from him considerable satisfaction; and, my mind being set in
action, I sometimes even improved upon the hints he furnished. His
conversation was particularly agreeable to me; I at first worked with
him sometimes for my amusement, and afterwards occasionally for a short
time as his journeyman. I was constitutionally vigorous; and, by the
experience thus attained, I added to the abstract possession of power,
the skill of applying it, when I pleased, in such a manner as that no
part should be inefficient.

It is a strange, but no uncommon feature in the human mind, that the
very resource of which we stand in greatest need in a critical
situation, though already accumulated, it may be, by preceding industry,
fails to present itself at the time when it should be called into
action. Thus my mind had passed through two very different stages since
my imprisonment, before this means of liberation suggested itself. My
faculties were overwhelmed in the first instance, and raised to a pitch
of enthusiasm in the second; while in both I took it for granted in a
manner, that I must passively submit to the good pleasure of my
persecutors.

During the period in which my mind had been thus undecided, and when I
had been little more than a month in durance, the assizes, which were
held twice a year in the town in which I was a prisoner, came on. Upon
this occasion my case was not brought forward, but was suffered to stand
over six months longer. It would have been just the same, if I had had
as strong reason to expect acquittal as I had conviction. If I had been
apprehended upon the most frivolous reasons upon which any justice of
the peace ever thought proper to commit a naked beggar for trial, I must
still have waited about two hundred and seventeen days before my
innocence could be cleared. So imperfect are the effects of the boasted
laws of a country, whose legislators hold their assembly from four to
six months in every year! I could never discover with certainty, whether
this delay were owing to any interference on the part of my prosecutor,
or whether it fell out in the regular administration of justice, which
is too solemn and dignified to accommodate itself to the rights or
benefit of an insignificant individual.

But this was not the only incident that occurred to me during my
confinement, for which I could find no satisfactory solution. It was
nearly at the same time, that the keeper began to alter his behaviour to
me. He sent for me one morning into the part of the building which was
appropriated for his own use, and, after some hesitation, told me he was
sorry my accommodations had been so indifferent, and asked whether I
should like to have a chamber in his family? I was struck with the
unexpectedness of this question, and desired to know whether any body
had employed him to ask it. No, he replied; but, now the assizes were
over, he had fewer felons on his hands, and more time to look about him.
He believed I was a good kind of a young man, and he had taken a sort of
a liking to me. I fixed my eye upon his countenance as he said this. I
could discover none of the usual symptoms of kindness; he appeared to me
to be acting a part, unnatural, and that sat with awkwardness upon him.
He went on however to offer me the liberty of eating at his table;
which, if I chose it, he said, would make no difference to him, and he
should not think of charging me any thing for it. He had always indeed
as much upon his hands as one person could see to; but his wife and his
daughter Peggy would be woundily pleased to hear a person of learning
talk, as he understood I was; and perhaps I might not feel myself
unpleasantly circumstanced in their company.

I reflected on this proposal, and had little doubt, notwithstanding what
the keeper had affirmed to the contrary, that it did not proceed from
any spontaneous humanity in him, but that he had, to speak the language
of persons of his cast, good reasons for what he did. I busied myself in
conjectures as to who could be the author of this sort of indulgence and
attention. The two most likely persons were Mr. Falkland and Mr.
Forester. The latter I knew to be a man austere and inexorable towards
those whom he deemed vicious. He piqued himself upon being insensible to
those softer emotions, which, he believed, answered no other purpose
than to seduce us from our duty. Mr. Falkland, on the contrary, was a
man of the acutest sensibility; hence arose his pleasures and his pains,
his virtues and his vices. Though he were the bitterest enemy to whom I
could possibly be exposed, and though no sentiments of humanity could
divert or control the bent of his mind, I yet persuaded myself, that he
was more likely than his kinsman, to visit in idea the scene of my
dungeon, and to feel impelled to alleviate my sufferings.

This conjecture was by no means calculated to serve as balm to my mind.
My thoughts were full of irritation against my persecutor. How could I
think kindly of a man, in competition with the gratification of whose
ruling passion my good name or my life was deemed of no consideration? I
saw him crushing the one, and bringing the other into jeopardy, with a
quietness and composure on his part that I could not recollect without
horror. I knew not what were his plans respecting me. I knew not whether
he troubled himself so much as to form a barren wish for the
preservation of one whose future prospects he had so iniquitously
tarnished. I had hitherto been silent as to my principal topic of
recrimination. But I was by no means certain, that I should consent to
go out of the world in silence, the victim of this man's obduracy and
art. In every view I felt my heart ulcerated with a sense of his
injustice; and my very soul spurned these pitiful indulgences, at a time
that he was grinding me into dust with the inexorableness of his
vengeance.

I was influenced by these sentiments in my reply to the jailor; and I
found a secret pleasure in pronouncing them in all their bitterness. I
viewed him with a sarcastic smile, and said, I was glad to find him of a
sudden become so humane: I was not however without some penetration as
to the humanity of a jailor, and could guess at the circumstances by
which it was produced. But he might tell his employer, that his cares
were fruitless: I would accept no favours from a man that held a halter
about my neck; and had courage enough to endure the worst both in time
to come and now.--The jailor looked at me with astonishment, and turning
upon his heel, exclaimed, "Well done, my cock! You have not had your
learning for nothing, I see. You are set upon not dying dunghill. But
that is to come, lad; you had better by half keep your courage till you
shall find it wanted."

The assizes, which passed over without influence to me, produced a great
revolution among my fellow-prisoners. I lived long enough in the jail to
witness a general mutation of its inhabitants. One of the housebreakers
(the rival of the Duke of Bedford), and the coiner, were hanged. Two
more were cast for transportation, and the rest acquitted. The
transports remained with us; and, though the prison was thus lightened
of nine of its inhabitants, there were, at the next half-yearly period
of assizes, as many persons on the felons' side, within three, as I had
found on my first arrival.

The soldier, whose story I have already recorded, died on the evening of
the very day on which the judges arrived, of a disease the consequence
of his confinement. Such was the justice, that resulted from the laws of
his country to an individual who would have been the ornament of any
age; one who, of all the men I ever knew, was perhaps the kindest, of
the most feeling heart, of the most engaging and unaffected manners, and
the most unblemished life. The name of this man was Brightwel. Were it
possible for my pen to consecrate him to never-dying fame, I could
undertake no task more grateful to my heart. His judgment was
penetrating and manly, totally unmixed with imbecility and confusion,
while at the same time there was such an uncontending frankness in his
countenance, that a superficial observer would have supposed he must
have been the prey of the first plausible knavery that was practised
against him. Great reason have I to remember him with affection! He was
the most ardent, I had almost said the last, of my friends. Nor did I
remain in this respect in his debt. There was indeed a great
congeniality, if I may presume to say so, in our characters, except that
I cannot pretend to rival the originality and self-created vigour of his
mind, or to compare with, what the world has scarcely surpassed, the
correctness and untainted purity of his conduct. He heard my story, as
far as I thought proper to disclose it, with interest; he examined it
with sincere impartiality; and if, at first, any doubt remained upon his
mind, a frequent observation of me in my most unguarded moments taught
him in no long time to place an unreserved confidence in my innocence.

He talked of the injustice of which we were mutual victims, without
bitterness; and delighted to believe that the time would come, when the
possibility of such intolerable oppression would be extirpated. But
this, he said, was a happiness reserved for posterity; it was too late
for us to reap the benefit of it. It was some consolation to him, that
he could not tell the period in his past life, which the best judgment
of which he was capable would teach him to spend better. He could say,
with as much reason as most men, he had discharged his duty. But he
foresaw that he should not survive his present calamity. This was his
prediction, while yet in health. He might be said, in a certain sense,
to have a broken heart. But, if that phrase were in any way applicable
to him, sure never was despair more calm, more full of resignation and
serenity.

At no time in the whole course of my adventures was I exposed to a shock
more severe, than I received from this man's death. The circumstances of
his fate presented themselves to my mind in their full complication of
iniquity. From him, and the execrations with which I loaded the
government that could be the instrument of his tragedy, I turned to
myself. I beheld the catastrophe of Brightwel with envy. A thousand
times I longed that my corse had lain in death, instead of his. I was
only reserved, as I persuaded myself, for unutterable woe. In a few days
he would have been acquitted; his liberty, his reputation restored;
mankind perhaps, struck with the injustice he had suffered, would have
shown themselves eager to balance his misfortunes, and obliterate his
disgrace. But this man died; and I remained alive! I, who, though not
less wrongfully treated than he, had no hope of reparation, must be
marked as long as I lived for a villain, and in my death probably held
up to the scorn and detestation of my species!

Such were some of the immediate reflections which the fate of this
unfortunate martyr produced in my mind. Yet my intercourse with
Brightwel was not, in the review, without its portion of comfort. I
said, "This man has seen through the veil of calumny that overshades me:
he has understood, and has loved me. Why should I despair? May I not
meet hereafter with men ingenuous like him, who shall do me justice, and
sympathise with my calamity? With that consolation I will be satisfied.
I will rest in the arms of friendship, and forget the malignity of the
world. Henceforth I will be contented with tranquil obscurity, with the
cultivation of sentiment and wisdom, and the exercise of benevolence
within a narrow circle." It was thus that my mind became excited to the
project I was about to undertake.

I had no sooner meditated the idea of an escape, than I determined upon
the following method of facilitating the preparations for it. I
undertook to ingratiate myself with my keeper. In the world I have
generally found such persons as had been acquainted with the outline of
my story, regarding me with a sort of loathing and abhorrence, which
made them avoid me with as much care as if I had been spotted with the
plague. The idea of my having first robbed my patron, and then
endeavouring to clear myself by charging him with subornation against
me, placed me in a class distinct from, and infinitely more guilty than
that of common felons. But this man was too good a master of his
profession, to entertain aversion against a fellow-creature upon that
score. He considered the persons committed to his custody, merely as so
many human bodies, for whom he was responsible that they should be
forthcoming in time and place; and the difference of innocence and guilt
he looked down upon as an affair beneath his attention. I had not
therefore the prejudices to encounter in recommending myself to him,
that I have found so peculiarly obstinate in other cases. Add to which,
the same motive, whatever it was, that had made him so profuse in his
offers a little before, had probably its influence on the present
occasion.

I informed him of my skill in the profession of a joiner, and offered to
make him half a dozen handsome chairs, if he would facilitate my
obtaining the tools necessary for carrying on my profession in my
present confinement; for, without his consent previously obtained, it
would have been in vain for me to expect that I could quietly exert an
industry of this kind, even if my existence had depended upon it. He
looked at me first, as asking himself what he was to understand by this
novel proposal; and then, his countenance most graciously relaxing,
said, he was glad I was come off a little of my high notions and my
buckram, and he would see what he could do. Two days after, he signified
his compliance. He said that, as to the matter of the present I had
offered him, he thought nothing of that; I might do as I pleased in it;
but I might depend upon every civility from him that he could show with
safety to himself, if so be as, when he was civil, I did not offer a
second time for to snap and take him up short.

Having thus gained my preliminary, I gradually accumulated tools of
various sorts--gimlets, piercers, chisels, _et cetera_. I immediately
set myself to work. The nights were long, and the sordid eagerness of my
keeper, notwithstanding his ostentatious generosity, was great; I
therefore petitioned for, and was indulged with, a bit of candle, that I
might amuse myself for an hour or two with my work after I was locked up
in my dungeon. I did not however by any means apply constantly to the
work I had undertaken, and my jailor betrayed various tokens of
impatience. Perhaps he was afraid I should not have finished it, before
I was hanged. I however insisted upon working at my leisure as I
pleased; and this he did not venture expressly to dispute. In addition
to the advantages thus obtained, I procured secretly from Miss Peggy,
who now and then came into the jail to make her observations of the
prisoners, and who seemed to have conceived some partiality for my
person, the implement of an iron crow.

In these proceedings it is easy to trace the vice and duplicity that
must be expected to grow out of injustice. I know not whether my readers
will pardon the sinister advantage I extracted from the mysterious
concessions of my keeper. But I must acknowledge my weakness in that
respect; I am writing my adventures, and not my apology; and I was not
prepared to maintain the unvaried sincerity of my manners, at the
expense of a speedy close of my existence.

My plan was now digested. I believed that, by means of the crow, I could
easily, and without much noise, force the door of my dungeon from its
hinges, or if not, that I could, in case of necessity, cut away the
lock. This door led into a narrow passage, bounded on one side by the
range of dungeons, and on the other by the jailor's and turnkeys'
apartments, through which was the usual entrance from the street. This
outlet I dared not attempt, for fear of disturbing the persons close to
whose very door I should in that case have found it necessary to pass. I
determined therefore upon another door at the further end of the
passage, which was well barricaded, and which led to a sort of garden in
the occupation of the keeper. This garden I had never entered, but I had
had an opportunity of observing it from the window of the felons'
day-room, which looked that way, the room itself being immediately over
the range of dungeons. I perceived that it was bounded by a wall of
considerable height, which I was told by my fellow-prisoners was the
extremity of the jail on that side, and beyond which was a back-lane of
some length, that terminated in the skirts of the town. Upon an accurate
observation, and much reflection upon the subject, I found I should be
able, if once I got into the garden, with my gimlets and piercers
inserted at proper distances to make a sort of ladder, by means of which
I could clear the wall, and once more take possession of the sweets of
liberty. I preferred this wall to that which immediately skirted my
dungeon, on the other side of which was a populous street.

I suffered about two days to elapse from the period at which I had
thoroughly digested my project, and then in the very middle of the night
began to set about its execution. The first door was attended with
considerable difficulty; but at length this obstacle was happily
removed. The second door was fastened on the inside. I was therefore
able with perfect ease to push back the bolts. But the lock, which of
course was depended upon for the principal security, and was therefore
strong, was double-shot, and the key taken away. I endeavoured with my
chisel to force back the bolt of the lock, but to no purpose. I then
unscrewed the box of the lock; and, that being taken away, the door was
no longer opposed to my wishes.

Thus far I had proceeded with the happiest success; but close on the
other side of the door there was a kennel with a large mastiff dog, of
which I had not the smallest previous knowledge. Though I stepped along
in the most careful manner, this animal was disturbed, and began to
bark. I was extremely disconcerted, but immediately applied myself to
soothe the animal, in which I presently succeeded. I then returned along
the passage to listen whether any body had been disturbed by the noise
of the dog; resolved, if that had been the case, that I would return to
my dungeon, and endeavour to replace every thing in its former state.
But the whole appeared perfectly quiet, and I was encouraged to proceed
in my operation.

I now got to the wall, and had nearly gained half the ascent, when I
heard a voice at the garden-door, crying, "Holloa! who is there? who
opened the door?" The man received no answer, and the night was too dark
for him to distinguish objects at any distance. He therefore returned,
as I judged, into the house for a light. Meantime the dog, understanding
the key in which these interrogations were uttered, began barking again
more violently than ever. I had now no possibility of retreat, and I was
not without hopes that I might yet accomplish my object, and clear the
wall. Meanwhile a second man came out, while the other was getting his
lantern, and by the time I had got to the top of the wall was able to
perceive me. He immediately set up a shout, and threw a large stone,
which grazed me in its flight. Alarmed at my situation, I was obliged
to descend on the other side without taking the necessary precautions,
and in my fall nearly dislocated my ankle.

There was a door in the wall, of which I was not previously apprised;
and, this being opened, the two men with the lantern were on the other
side in an instant. They had then nothing to do but to run along the
lane to the place from which I had descended. I endeavoured to rise
after my fall; but the pain was so intense, that I was scarcely able to
stand, and, after having limped a few paces, I twisted my foot under me,
and fell down again. I had now no remedy, and quietly suffered myself to
be retaken.




CHAPTER XIV.


I was conducted to the keeper's room for that night, and the two men sat
up with me. I was accosted with many interrogatories, to which I gave
little answer, but complained of the hurt in my leg. To this I could
obtain no reply, except "Curse you, my lad! if that be all, we will give
you some ointment for that; we will anoint it with a little cold iron."
They were indeed excessively sulky with me, for having broken their
night's rest, and given them all this trouble. In the morning they were
as good as their word, fixing a pair of fetters upon both my legs,
regardless of the ankle which was now swelled to a considerable size,
and then fastening me, with a padlock, to a staple in the floor of my
dungeon. I expostulated with warmth upon this treatment, and told them,
that I was a man upon whom the law as yet had passed no censure, and who
therefore, in the eye of the law, was innocent. But they bid me keep
such fudge for people who knew no better; they knew what they did, and
would answer it to any court in England.

The pain of the fetter was intolerable. I endeavoured in various ways to
relieve it, and even privily to free my leg; but the more it was
swelled, the more was this rendered impossible. I then resolved to bear
it with patience: still, the longer it continued, the worse it grew.
After two days and two nights, I entreated the turnkey to go and ask the
surgeon, who usually attended the prison, to look at it, for, if it
continued longer as it was, I was convinced it would mortify. But he
glared surlily at me, and said, "Damn my blood! I should like to see
that day. To die of a mortification is too good an end for such a
rascal!" At the time that he thus addressed me, the whole mass of my
blood was already fevered by the anguish I had undergone, my patience
was wholly exhausted, and I was silly enough to be irritated beyond
bearing, by his impertinence and vulgarity: "Look, you, Mr. Turnkey,"
said I, "there is one thing that such fellows as you are set over us
for, and another thing that you are not. You are to take care we do not
escape; but it is no part of your office to call us names and abuse us.
If I were not chained to the floor, you dare as well eat your fingers as
use such language; and, take my word for it, you shall yet live to
repent of your insolence."

While I thus spoke, the man stared at me with astonishment. He was so
little accustomed to such retorts, that, at first, he could scarcely
believe his ears; and such was the firmness of my manner, that he seemed
to forget for a moment that I was not at large. But, as soon as he had
time to recollect himself, he did not deign to be angry. His face
relaxed into a smile of contempt; he snapped his fingers at me; and,
turning upon his heel, exclaimed, "Well said, my cock! crow away! Have a
care you do not burst!" and, as he shut the door upon me, mimicked the
voice of the animal he mentioned.

This rejoinder brought me to myself in a moment, and showed me the
impotence of the resentment I was expressing. But, though he thus put an
end to the violence of my speech, the torture of my body continued as
great as ever. I was determined to change my mode of attack. The same
turnkey returned in a few minutes; and, as he approached me, to put down
some food he had brought, I slipped a shilling into his hand, saying at
the same time, "My good fellow, for God's sake, go to the surgeon; I am
sure you do not wish me to perish for want of assistance." The fellow
put the shilling into his pocket, looked hard at me, and then with one
nod of his head, and without uttering a single word, went away. The
surgeon presently after made his appearance; and, finding the part in a
high state of inflammation, ordered certain applications, and gave
peremptory directions that the fetter should not be replaced upon that
leg, till a cure had been effected. It was a full month before the leg
was perfectly healed, and made equally strong and flexible with the
other.

The condition in which I was now placed, was totally different from that
which had preceded this attempt. I was chained all day in my dungeon,
with no other mitigation, except that the door was regularly opened for
a few hours in an afternoon, at which time some of the prisoners
occasionally came and spoke to me, particularly one, who, though he
could ill replace my benevolent Brightwel, was not deficient in
excellent qualities. This was no other than the individual whom Mr.
Falkland had, some months before, dismissed upon an accusation of
murder. His courage was gone, his garb was squalid, and the comeliness
and clearness of his countenance was utterly obliterated. He also was
innocent, worthy, brave, and benevolent. He was, I believe, afterwards
acquitted, and turned loose, to wander a desolate and perturbed spectre
through the world. My manual labours were now at an end; my dungeon was
searched every night, and every kind of tool carefully kept from me. The
straw, which had been hitherto allowed me, was removed, under pretence
that it was adapted for concealment; and the only conveniences with
which I was indulged, were a chair and a blanket.

A prospect of some alleviation in no long time opened upon me; but this
my usual ill fortune rendered abortive. The keeper once more made his
appearance, and with his former constitutional and ambiguous humanity.
He pretended to be surprised at my want of every accommodation. He
reprehended in strong terms my attempt to escape, and observed, that
there must be an end of civility from people in his situation, if
gentlemen, after all, would not know when they were well. It was
necessary, in cases the like of this, to let the law take its course;
and it would be ridiculous in me to complain, if, after a regular trial,
things should go hard with me. He was desirous of being in every respect
my friend, if I would let him. In the midst of this circumlocution and
preamble, he was called away from me, for something relating to the
business of his office. In the mean time I ruminated upon his overtures;
and, detesting as I did the source from which I conceived them to flow,
I could not help reflecting how far it would be possible to extract from
them the means of escape. But my meditations in this case were vain.
The keeper returned no more during the remainder of that day, and, on
the next, an incident occurred which put an end to all expectations from
his kindness.

An active mind, which has once been forced into any particular train,
can scarcely be persuaded to desert it as hopeless. I had studied my
chains, during the extreme anguish that I endured from the pressure of
the fetter upon the ankle which had been sprained; and though, from the
swelling and acute sensibility of the part, I had found all attempts at
relief, in that instance, impracticable, I obtained, from the coolness
of my investigation, another and apparently superior advantage. During
the night, my dungeon was in a complete state of darkness; but, when the
door was open, the case was somewhat different. The passage indeed into
which it opened, was so narrow, and the opposite dead wall so near, that
it was but a glimmering and melancholy light that entered my apartment,
even at full noon, and when the door was at its widest extent. But my
eyes, after a practice of two or three weeks, accommodated themselves to
this circumstance, and I learned to distinguish the minutest object. One
day, as I was alternately meditating and examining the objects around
me, I chanced to observe a nail trodden into the mud-floor at no great
distance from me. I immediately conceived the desire of possessing
myself of this implement; but, for fear of surprise, people passing
perpetually to and fro, I contented myself, for the present, with
remarking its situation so accurately, that I might easily find it again
in the dark. Accordingly, as soon as my door was shut, I seized upon
this new treasure, and, having contrived to fashion it to my purpose,
found that I could unlock with it the padlock that fastened me to the
staple in the floor. This I regarded as no inconsiderable advantage,
separately from the use I might derive from it in relation to my
principal object. My chain permitted me to move only about eighteen
inches to the right or left; and, having borne this confinement for
several weeks, my very heart leaped at the pitiful consolation of being
able to range, without constraint, the miserable coop in which I was
immured. This incident had occurred several days previously to the last
visit of my keeper.

From this time it had been my constant practice to liberate myself every
night, and not to replace things in their former situation till I awoke
in the morning, and expected shortly to perceive the entrance of the
turnkey. Security breeds negligence. On the morning succeeding my
conference with the jailor, it so happened, whether I overslept myself,
or the turnkey went his round earlier than usual, that I was roused from
my sleep by the noise he made in opening the cell next to my own; and
though I exerted the utmost diligence, yet having to grope for my
materials in the dark, I was unable to fasten the chain to the staple,
before he entered, as usual, with his lantern. He was extremely
surprised to find me disengaged, and immediately summoned the principal
keeper. I was questioned respecting my method of proceeding; and, as I
believed concealment could lead to nothing but a severer search, and a
more accurate watch, I readily acquainted them with the exact truth. The
illustrious personage, whose functions it was to control the inhabitants
of these walls, was, by this last instance, completely exasperated
against me. Artifice and fair speaking were at an end. His eyes sparkled
with fury; he exclaimed, that he was now convinced of the folly of
showing kindness to rascals, the scum of the earth, such as I was; and,
damn him, if any body should catch him at that again towards any one. I
had cured him effectually! He was astonished that the laws had not
provided some terrible retaliation for thieves that attempted to deceive
their jailors. Hanging was a thousand times too good for me!

Having vented his indignation, he proceeded to give such orders as the
united instigations of anger and alarm suggested to his mind. My
apartment was changed. I was conducted to a room called the strong room,
the door of which opened into the middle cell of the range of dungeons.
It was under-ground, as they were, and had also the day-room for felons,
already described, immediately over it. It was spacious and dreary. The
door had not been opened for years; the air was putrid; and the walls
hung round with damps and mildew. The fetters, the padlock, and the
staple, were employed, as in the former case, in addition to which they
put on me a pair of handcuffs. For my first provision, the keeper sent
me nothing but a bit of bread, mouldy and black, and some dirty and
stinking water. I know not indeed whether this is to be regarded as
gratuitous tyranny on the part of the jailor; the law having providently
directed, in certain cases, that the water to be administered to the
prisoners shall be taken from "the next sink or puddle nearest to the
jail."[E] It was further ordered, that one of the turnkeys should sleep
in the cell that formed a sort of anti-chamber to my apartment. Though
every convenience was provided, to render this chamber fit for the
reception of a personage of a dignity so superior to the felon he was
appointed to guard, he expressed much dissatisfaction at the mandate:
but there was no alternative.

[Footnote E: In the case of the _peine forte et dure_. See State Trials,
Vol. I. _anno_ 1615.]

The situation to which I was thus removed was, apparently, the most
undesirable that could be imagined but I was not discouraged; I had for
some time learned not to judge by appearances. The apartment was dark
and unwholesome; but I had acquired the secret of counteracting these
influences. My door was kept continually shut, and the other prisoners
were debarred access to me; but if the intercourse of our fellow-men has
its pleasure, solitude, on the other hand, is not without its
advantages. In solitude we can pursue our own thoughts undisturbed; and
I was able to call up at will the most pleasing avocations. Besides
which, to one who meditated such designs as now filled my mind, solitude
had peculiar recommendations. I was scarcely left to myself, before I
tried an experiment, the idea of which I conceived, while they were
fixing my handcuffs; and, with my teeth only, disengaged myself from
this restraint. The hours at which I was visited by the keepers were
regular, and I took care to be provided for them. Add to which, I had a
narrow grated window near the ceiling, about nine inches in
perpendicular, and a foot and a half horizontally, which, though small,
admitted a much stronger light than that to which I had been accustomed
for several weeks. Thus circumstanced, I scarcely ever found myself in
total darkness, and was better provided against surprises than I had
been in my preceding situation. Such were the sentiments which this
change of abode immediately suggested.

I had been a very little time removed, when I received an unexpected
visit from Thomas, Mr. Falkland's footman, whom I have already mentioned
in the course of my narrative. A servant of Mr. Forester happened to
come to the town where I was imprisoned, a few weeks before, while I was
confined with the hurt in my ankle, and had called in to see me. The
account he gave of what he observed had been the source of many an
uneasy sensation to Thomas. The former visit was a matter of mere
curiosity; but Thomas was of the better order of servants. He was
considerably struck at the sight of me. Though my mind was now serene,
and my health sufficiently good, yet the floridness of my complexion was
gone, and there was a rudeness in my physiognomy, the consequence of
hardship and fortitude, extremely unlike the sleekness of my better
days. Thomas looked alternately in my face, at my hands, and my feet;
and then fetched a deep sigh. After a pause,

"Lord bless us!" said he, in a voice in which commiseration was
sufficiently perceptible, "is this you?"

"Why not, Thomas? You knew I was sent to prison, did not you?"

"Prison! and must people in prison be shackled and bound of that
fashion?--and where do you lay of nights?"

"Here."

"Here? Why there is no bed!"

"No, Thomas, I am not allowed a bed. I had straw formerly, but that is
taken away."

"And do they take off them there things of nights?"

"No; I am expected to sleep just as you see."

"Sleep! Why I thought this was a Christian country; but this usage is
too bad for a dog."

"You must not say so, Thomas; it is what the wisdom of government has
thought fit to provide."

"Zounds, how I have been deceived! They told me what a fine thing it was
to be an Englishman, and about liberty and property, and all that there;
and I find it is all a flam. Lord, what fools we be! Things are done
under our very noses, and we know nothing of the matter; and a parcel of
fellows with grave faces swear to us, that such things never happen but
in France, and other countries the like of that. Why, you ha'n't been
tried, ha' you?"

"No."

"And what signifies being tried, when they do worse than hang a man, and
all beforehand? Well, master Williams, you have been very wicked to be
sure, and I thought it would have done me good to see you hanged. But, I
do not know how it is, one's heart melts, and pity comes over one, if we
take time to cool. I know that ought not to be; but, damn it, when I
talked of your being hanged, I did not think of your suffering all this
into the bargain."

Soon after this conversation Thomas left me. The idea of the long
connection of our families rushed upon his memory, and he felt more for
my sufferings, at the moment, than I did for myself. In the afternoon I
was surprised to see him again. He said that he could not get the
thought of me out of his mind, and therefore he hoped I would not be
displeased at his coming once more to take leave of me. I could perceive
that he had something upon his mind, which he did not know how to
discharge. One of the turnkeys had each time come into the room with
him, and continued as long as he staid. Upon some avocation however--a
noise, I believe, in the passage--the turnkey went as far as the door to
satisfy his curiosity; and Thomas, watching the opportunity, slipped
into my hand a chisel, a file, and a saw, exclaiming at the same time
with a sorrowful tone, "I know I am doing wrong; but, if they hang me
too, I cannot help it; I cannot do no other. For Christ's sake, get out
of this place; I cannot bear the thoughts of it!" I received the
implements with great joy, and thrust them into my bosom; and, as soon
as he was gone, concealed them in the rushes of my chair. For himself
he had accomplished the object for which he came, and presently after
bade me farewell.

The next day, the keepers, I know not for what reason, were more than
usually industrious in their search, saying, though without assigning
any ground for their suspicion, that they were sure I had some tool in
my possession that I ought not; but the depository I had chosen escaped
them.

I waited from this time the greater part of a week, that I might have
the benefit of a bright moonlight. It was necessary that I should work
in the night; it was necessary that my operations should be performed
between the last visit of the keepers at night and their first in the
morning, that is, between nine in the evening and seven. In my dungeon,
as I have already said, I passed fourteen or sixteen hours of the
four-and-twenty undisturbed; but since I had acquired a character for
mechanical ingenuity, a particular exception with respect to me was made
from the general rules of the prison.

It was ten o'clock when I entered on my undertaking. The room in which I
was confined was secured with a double door. This was totally
superfluous for the purpose of my detention, since there was a sentinel
planted on the outside. But it was very fortunate for my plan; because
these doors prevented the easy communication of sound, and afforded me
tolerable satisfaction that, with a little care in my mode of
proceeding, I might be secure against the danger of being overheard. I
first took off my handcuffs. I then filed through my fetters; and next
performed the same service to three of the iron bars that secured my
window, to which I climbed, partly by the assistance of my chair, and
partly by means of certain irregularities in the wall. All this was the
work of more than two hours. When the bars were filed through, I easily
forced them a little from the perpendicular, and then drew them, one by
one, out of the wall, into which they were sunk about three inches
perfectly straight, and without any precaution to prevent their being
removed. But the space thus obtained was by no means wide enough to
admit the passing of my body. I therefore applied myself, partly with my
chisel, and partly with one of the iron bars, to the loosening the
brick-work; and when I had thus disengaged four or five bricks, I got
down and piled them upon the floor. This operation I repeated three or
four times The space was now sufficient for my purpose: and, having
crept through the opening, I stepped upon a shed on the outside.

I was now in a kind of rude area between two dead walls, that south of
the felons' day-room (the windows of which were at the east end) and the
wall of the prison. But I had not, as formerly, any instruments to
assist me in scaling the wall, which was of considerable height. There
was, of consequence, no resource for me but that of effecting a
practicable breach in the lower part of the wall, which was of no
contemptible strength, being of stone on the outside, with a facing of
brick within. The rooms for the debtors were at right angles with the
building from which I had just escaped; and, as the night was extremely
bright, I was in momentary danger, particularly in case of the least
noise, of being discovered by them, several of their windows commanding
this area. Thus circumstanced, I determined to make the shed answer the
purpose of concealment. It was locked; but, with the broken link of my
fetters, which I had had the precaution to bring with me, I found no
great difficulty in opening the lock. I had now got a sufficient means
of hiding my person while I proceeded in my work, attended with no
other disadvantage than that of being obliged to leave the door, through
which I had thus broken, a little open for the sake of light. After some
time, I had removed a considerable part of the brick-work of the outer
wall; but, when I came to the stone, I found the undertaking infinitely
more difficult. The mortar which bound together the building was, by
length of time, nearly petrified, and appeared to my first efforts one
solid rock of the hardest adamant. I had now been six hours incessantly
engaged in incredible labour: my chisel broke in the first attempt upon
this new obstacle; and between fatigue already endured, and the
seemingly invincible difficulty before me, I concluded that I must
remain where I was, and gave up the idea of further effort as useless.
At the same time the moon, whose light had till now been of the greatest
use to me, set, and I was left in total darkness.

After a respite of ten minutes however, I returned to the attack with
new vigour. It could not be less than two hours before the first stone
was loosened from the edifice. In one hour more, the space was
sufficient to admit of my escape. The pile of bricks I had left in the
strong room was considerable. But it was a mole-hill compared with the
ruins I had forced from the outer wall. I am fully assured that the work
I had thus performed would have been to a common labourer, with every
advantage of tools, the business of two or three days. But my
difficulties, instead of being ended, seemed to be only begun. The day
broke, before I had completed the opening, and in ten minutes more the
keepers would probably enter my apartment, and perceive the devastation
I had left. The lane, which connected the side of the prison through
which I had escaped with the adjacent country, was formed chiefly by
two dead walls, with here and there a stable, a few warehouses, and some
mean habitations, tenanted by the lower order of people. My best
security lay in clearing the town as soon as possible, and depending
upon the open country for protection. My arms were intolerably swelled
and bruised with my labour, and my strength seemed wholly exhausted with
fatigue. Speed I was nearly unable to exert for any continuance; and, if
I could, with the enemy so close at my heels, speed would too probably
have been useless. It appeared as if I were now in almost the same
situation as that in which I had been placed five or six weeks before,
in which, after having completed my escape, I was obliged to yield
myself up, without resistance, to my pursuers. I was not however
disabled as then; I was capable of exertion, to what precise extent I
could not ascertain; and I was well aware, that every instance in which
I should fail of my purpose would contribute to enhance the difficulty
of any future attempt. Such were the considerations that presented
themselves in relation to my escape; and, even if that were effected, I
had to reckon among my difficulties, that, at the time I quitted my
prison, I was destitute of every resource, and had not a shilling
remaining in the world.


END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

       *       *       *       *       *




VOLUME THE THIRD.




CHAPTER I.


I passed along the lane I have described, without perceiving or being
observed by a human being. The doors were shut, the window-shutters
closed, and all was still as night. I reached the extremity of the lane
unmolested. My pursuers, if they immediately followed, would know that
the likelihood was small, of my having in the interval found shelter in
this place; and would proceed without hesitation, as I on my part was
obliged to do, from the end nearest to the prison to its furthest
termination.

The face of the country, in the spot to which I had thus opened myself a
passage, was rude and uncultivated. It was overgrown with brushwood and
furze; the soil was for the most part of a loose sand; and the surface
extremely irregular. I climbed a small eminence, and could perceive, not
very remote in the distance, a few cottages thinly scattered. This
prospect did not altogether please me; I conceived that my safety would,
for the present, be extremely assisted, by keeping myself from the view
of any human being.

I therefore came down again into the valley, and upon a careful
examination perceived that it was interspersed with cavities, some
deeper than others, but all of them so shallow, as neither to be capable
of hiding a man, nor of exciting suspicion as places of possible
concealment. Meanwhile the day had but just begun to dawn; the morning
was lowering and drizzly; and, though the depth of these caverns was of
course well known to the neighbouring inhabitants, the shadows they cast
were so black and impenetrable, as might well have produced wider
expectations in the mind of a stranger. Poor therefore as was the
protection they were able to afford, I thought it right to have recourse
to it for the moment, as the best the emergency would supply. It was for
my life; and, the greater was the jeopardy to which it was exposed, the
more dear did that life seem to become to my affections. The recess I
chose, as most secure, was within little more than a hundred yards of
the end of the lane, and the extreme buildings of the town.

I had not stood up in this manner two minutes, before I heard the sound
of feet, and presently saw the ordinary turnkey and another pass the
place of my retreat. They were so close to me that, if I had stretched
out my hand, I believe I could have caught hold of their clothes,
without so much as changing my posture. As no part of the overhanging
earth intervened between me and them, I could see them entire, though
the deepness of the shade rendered me almost completely invisible. I
heard them say to each other, in tones of vehement asperity, "Curse the
rascal! which way can he be gone?" The reply was, "Damn him! I wish we
had him but safe once again!"--"Never fear!" rejoined the first; "he
cannot have above half a mile the start of us." They were presently out
of hearing; for, as to sight, I dared not advance my body, so much as an
inch, to look after them, lest I should be discovered by my pursuers in
some other direction. From the very short time that elapsed, between my
escape and the appearance of these men, I concluded that they had made
their way through the same outlet as I had done, it being impossible
that they could have had time to come, from the gate of the prison, and
so round a considerable part of the town, as they must otherwise have
done.

I was so alarmed at this instance of diligence on the part of the enemy,
that, for some time, I scarcely ventured to proceed an inch from my
place of concealment, or almost to change my posture. The morning, which
had been bleak and drizzly, was succeeded by a day of heavy and
incessant rain; and the gloomy state of the air and surrounding objects,
together with the extreme nearness of my prison, and a total want of
food, caused me to pass the hours in no very agreeable sensations. This
inclemency of the weather however, which generated a feeling of
stillness and solitude, encouraged me by degrees to change my retreat,
for another of the same nature, out of somewhat greater security. I
hovered with little variation about a single spot, as long as the sun
continued above the horizon.

Towards evening, the clouds began to disperse, and the moon shone, as on
the preceding night, in full brightness. I had perceived no human
creature during the whole day, except in the instance already mentioned.
This had perhaps been owing to the nature of the day; at all events I
considered it as too hazardous an experiment, to venture from my
hiding-place in so clear and fine a night. I was therefore obliged to
wait for the setting of this luminary, which was not till near five
o'clock in the morning. My only relief during this interval was to allow
myself to sink to the bottom of my cavern, it being scarcely possible
for me to continue any longer on my feet. Here I fell into an
interrupted and unrefreshing doze, the consequence of a laborious night,
and a tedious, melancholy day; though I rather sought to avoid sleep,
which, cooperating with the coldness of the season, would tend more to
injury than advantage.

The period of darkness, which I had determined to use for the purpose of
removing to a greater distance from my prison, was, in its whole
duration, something less than three hours. When I rose from my seat, I
was weak with hunger and fatigue, and, which was worse, I seemed,
between the dampness of the preceding day and the sharp, clear frost of
the night, to have lost the command of my limbs. I stood up and shook
myself; I leaned against the side of the hill, impelling in different
directions the muscles of the extremities; and at length recovered in
some degree the sense of feeling. This operation was attended with an
incredible aching pain, and required no common share of resolution to
encounter and prosecute it. Having quitted my retreat, I at first
advanced with weak and tottering steps; but, as I proceeded, increased
my pace. The barren heath, which reached to the edge of the town, was,
at least on this side, without a path; but the stars shone, and, guiding
myself by them, I determined to steer as far as possible from the
hateful scene where I had been so long confined. The line I pursued was
of irregular surface, sometimes obliging me to climb a steep ascent, and
at others to go down into a dark and impenetrable dell. I was often
compelled, by the dangerousness of the way, to deviate considerably from
the direction I wished to pursue. In the mean time I advanced with as
much rapidity as these and similar obstacles would permit me to do. The
swiftness of the motion, and the thinness of the air, restored to me my
alacrity. I forgot the inconveniences under which I laboured, and my
mind became lively, spirited, and enthusiastic.

I had now reached the border of the heath, and entered upon what is
usually termed the forest. Strange as it may seem, it is nevertheless
true, that, in this conjuncture, exhausted with hunger, destitute of all
provision for the future, and surrounded with the most alarming dangers,
my mind suddenly became glowing, animated, and cheerful. I thought that,
by this time, the most formidable difficulties of my undertaking were
surmounted; and I could not believe that, after having effected so much,
I should find any thing invincible in what remained to be done. I
recollected the confinement I had undergone, and the fate that had
impended over me, with horror. Never did man feel more vividly, than I
felt at that moment, the sweets of liberty. Never did man more
strenuously prefer poverty with independence, to the artificial
allurements of a life of slavery. I stretched forth my arms with
rapture; I clapped my hands one upon the other, and exclaimed, "Ah, this
is indeed to be a man! These wrists were lately galled with fetters; all
my motions, whether I rose up or sat down, were echoed to with the
clanking of chains; I was tied down like a wild beast, and could not
move but in a circle of a few feet in circumference. Now I can run fleet
as a greyhound, and leap like a young roe upon the mountains. Oh, God!
(if God there be that condescends to record the lonely beatings of an
anxious heart) thou only canst tell with what delight a prisoner, just
broke forth from his dungeon, hugs the blessings of new-found liberty!
Sacred and indescribable moment, when man regains his rights! But lately
I held my life in jeopardy, because one man was unprincipled enough to
assert what he knew to be false; I was destined to suffer an early and
inexorable death from the hands of others, because none of them had
penetration enough to distinguish from falsehood, what I uttered with
the entire conviction of a full-fraught heart! Strange, that men, from
age to age, should consent to hold their lives at the breath of another,
merely that each in his turn may have a power of acting the tyrant
according to law! Oh, God! give me poverty! shower upon me all the
imaginary hardships of human life! I will receive them all with
thankfulness. Turn me a prey to the wild beasts of the desert, so I be
never again the victim of man, dressed in the gore-dripping robes of
authority! Suffer me at least to call life, and the pursuits of life, my
own! Let me hold it at the mercy of the elements, of the hunger of
beasts, or the revenge of barbarians, but not of the cold-blooded
prudence of monopolists and kings!"--How enviable was the enthusiasm
which could thus furnish me with energy, in the midst of hunger,
poverty, and universal desertion!

I had now walked at least six miles. At first I carefully avoided the
habitations that lay in my way, and feared to be seen by any of the
persons to whom they belonged, lest it should in any degree furnish a
clue to the researches of my pursuers. As I went forward, I conceived it
might be proper to relax a part of my precaution. At this time I
perceived several persons coming out of a thicket close to me. I
immediately considered this circumstance as rather favourable than the
contrary. It was necessary for me to avoid entering any of the towns and
villages in the vicinity. It was however full time that I should procure
for myself some species of refreshment, and by no means improbable that
these men might be in some way assisting to me in that respect. In my
situation it appeared to me indifferent what might be their employment
or profession. I had little to apprehend from thieves, and I believed
that they, as well as honest men, could not fail to have some compassion
for a person under my circumstances. I therefore rather threw myself in
their way than avoided them.

They were thieves. One of the company cried out, "Who goes there?
stand!" I accosted them; "Gentlemen," said I, "I am a poor traveller,
almost"--While I spoke, they came round me; and he that had first
hailed me, said, "Damn me, tip us none of your palaver; we have heard
that story of a poor traveller any time these five years. Come, down
with your dust! let us see what you have got!"--"Sir," I replied, "I
have not a shilling in the world, and am more than half starved
beside."--"Not a shilling!" answered my assailant, "what, I suppose you
are as poor as a thief? But, if you have not money, you have clothes,
and those you must resign."

"My clothes!" rejoined I with indignation, "you cannot desire such a
thing. Is it not enough that I am pennyless? I have been all night upon
the open heath. It is now the second day that I have not eaten a morsel
of bread. Would you strip me naked to the weather in the midst of this
depopulated forest? No, no, you are men! The same hatred of oppression,
that arms you against the insolence of wealth, will teach you to relieve
those who are perishing like me. For God's sake, give me food! do not
strip me of the comforts I still possess!"

While I uttered this apostrophe, the unpremeditated eloquence of
sentiment, I could perceive by their gestures, though the day had not
yet begun to dawn, that the feelings of one or two of the company
appeared to take my part. The man, who had already undertaken to be
their spokesman, perceived the same thing; and, excited either by the
brutality of his temper or the love of command, hastened to anticipate
the disgrace of a defeat. He brushed suddenly up to me, and by main
force pushed me several feet from the place where I stood. The shock I
received drove me upon a second of the gang, not one of those who had
listened to my expostulation; and he repeated the brutality. My
indignation was strongly excited by this treatment; and, after being
thrust backward and forward two or three times in this manner, I broke
through my assailants, and turned round to defend myself. The first that
advanced within my reach, was my original enemy. In the present moment I
listened to nothing but the dictates of passion, and I laid him at his
length on the earth. I was immediately assailed with sticks and
bludgeons on all sides, and presently received a blow that almost
deprived me of my senses. The man I had knocked down was now upon his
feet again, and aimed a stroke at me with a cutlass as I fell, which
took place in a deep wound upon my neck and shoulder. He was going to
repeat his blow. The two who had seemed to waver at first in their
animosity, afterwards appeared to me to join in the attack, urged either
by animal sympathy or the spirit of imitation. One of them however, as I
afterwards, understood seized the arm of the man who was going to strike
me a second time with his cutlass, and who would otherwise probably have
put an end to my existence. I could hear the words, "Damn it, enough,
enough! that is too bad, Gines!"--"How so?" replied a second voice; "he
will but pine here upon the forest, and die by inches: it will be an act
of charity to put him out of his pain."--It will be imagined that I was
not uninterested in this sort of debate. I made an effort to speak; my
voice failed me. I stretched out one hand with a gesture of entreaty.
"You shall not strike, by God!" said one of the voices; "why should we
be murderers?"--The side of forbearance at length prevailed. They
therefore contented themselves with stripping me of my coat and
waistcoat, and rolling me into a dry ditch. They then left me totally
regardless of my distressed condition, and the plentiful effusion of
blood, which streamed from my wound.




CHAPTER II.


In this woeful situation, though extremely weak, I was not deprived of
sense. I tore my shirt from my naked body, and endeavoured, with some
success, to make of it a bandage to staunch the flowing of the blood. I
then exerted myself to crawl up the side of the ditch. I had scarcely
effected the latter, when, with equal surprise and joy, I perceived a
man advancing at no great distance. I called for help as well as I
could. The man came towards me with evident signs of compassion, and the
appearance I exhibited was indeed sufficiently calculated to excite it.
I had no hat. My hair was dishevelled, and the ends of the locks clotted
with blood. My shirt was wrapped about my neck and shoulders, and was
plentifully stained with red. My body, which was naked to my middle, was
variegated with streams of blood; nor had my lower garments, which were
white, by any means escaped.

"For God's sake, my good fellow!" said he, with a tone of the greatest
imaginable kindness, "how came you thus?" and, saying this, he lifted me
up, and set me on my feet. "Can you stand?" added he, doubtfully. "Oh,
yes, very well," I replied. Having received this answer, he quitted me,
and began to take off his own coat, that he might cover me from the
cold. I had however over-rated my strength, and was no sooner left to
myself than I reeled, and fell almost at my length upon the ground. But
I broke my fall by stretching out my sound arm, and again raised myself
upon my knees. My benefactor now covered me, raised me, and, bidding me
lean upon him, told me he would presently conduct me to a place where I
should be taken care of. Courage is a capricious property; and, though
while I had no one to depend upon but myself, I possessed a mine of
seemingly inexhaustible fortitude, yet no sooner did I find this
unexpected sympathy on the part of another, than my resolution appeared
to give way, and I felt ready to faint. My charitable conductor
perceived this, and every now and then encouraged me, in a manner so
cheerful, so good humoured and benevolent, equally free from the torture
of droning expostulation, and the weakness of indulgence, that I thought
myself under the conduct of an angel rather than a man. I could perceive
that his behaviour had in it nothing of boorishness, and that he was
thoroughly imbued with the principles of affectionate civility.

We walked about three quarters of a mile, and that not towards the open,
but the most uncouth and unfrequented part of the forest. We crossed a
place which had once been a moat, but which was now in some parts dry,
and in others contained a little muddy and stagnated water. Within the
enclosure of this moat, I could only discover a pile of ruins, and
several walls, the upper part of which seemed to overhang their
foundations, and to totter to their ruin. After having entered however
with my conductor through an archway, and passed along a winding
passage that was perfectly dark, we came to a stand.

At the upper end of this passage was a door, which I was unable to
perceive. My conductor knocked at the door, and was answered by a voice
from within, which, for body and force, might have been the voice of a
man, but with a sort of female sharpness and acidity, enquiring, "Who is
there?" Satisfaction was no sooner given on this point, than I heard two
bolts pushed back, and the door unlocked. The apartment opened, and we
entered. The interior of this habitation by no means corresponded with
the appearance of my protector, but, on the contrary, wore the face of
discomfort, carelessness, and dirt. The only person I saw within was a
woman, rather advanced in life, and whose person had I know not what of
extraordinary and loathsome. Her eyes were red and blood-shot; her hair
was pendent in matted and shaggy tresses about her shoulders; her
complexion swarthy, and of the consistency of parchment; her form spare,
and her whole body, her arms in particular, uncommonly vigorous and
muscular. Not the milk of human kindness, but the feverous blood of
savage ferocity, seemed to flow from her heart; and her whole figure
suggested an idea of unmitigable energy, and an appetite gorged in
malevolence. This infernal Thalestris had no sooner cast her eyes upon
us as we entered, than she exclaimed in a discordant and discontented
voice, "What have we got here? this is not one of our people!" My
conductor, without answering this apostrophe, bade her push an easy
chair which stood in one corner, and set it directly before the fire.
This she did with apparent reluctance, murmuring, "Ah! you are at your
old tricks; I wonder what such folks as we have to do with charity! It
will be the ruin of us at last, I can see that!"--"Hold your tongue,
beldam!" said he, with a stern significance of manner, "and fetch one of
my best shirts, a waistcoat, and some dressings." Saying this, he at the
same time put into her hand a small bunch of keys. In a word, he treated
me with as much kindness as if he had been my father. He examined my
wound, washed and dressed it; at the same time that the old woman, by
his express order, prepared for me such nourishment as he thought most
suitable to my weak and languid condition.

These operations were no sooner completed than my benefactor recommended
to me to retire to rest, and preparations were making for that purpose,
when suddenly a trampling of feet was heard, succeeded by a knock at the
door. The old woman opened the door with the same precautions as had
been employed upon our arrival, and immediately six or seven persons
tumultuously entered the apartment. Their appearance was different, some
having the air of mere rustics, and others that of a tarnished sort of
gentry. All had a feature of boldness, inquietude, and disorder,
extremely unlike any thing I had before observed in such a group. But my
astonishment was still increased, when upon a second glance I perceived
something in the general air of several of them, and of one in
particular, that persuaded me they were the gang from which I had just
escaped, and this one the antagonist by whose animosity I was so near
having been finally destroyed. I imagined they had entered the hovel
with a hostile intention, that my benefactor was upon the point of being
robbed, and I probably murdered.

This suspicion however was soon removed. They addressed my conductor
with respect, under the appellation of captain. They were boisterous and
noisy in their remarks and exclamations, but their turbulence was
tempered by a certain deference to his opinion and authority. I could
observe in the person who had been my active opponent some awkwardness
and irresolution as he first perceived me, which he dismissed with a
sort of effort, exclaiming, "Who the devil is here?" There was something
in the tone of this apostrophe that roused the attention of my
protector. He looked at the speaker with a fixed and penetrating glance,
and then said, "Nay, Gines, do you know? Did you ever see the person
before?"--"Curse it, Gines!" interrupted a third, "you are damnably out
of luck. They say dead men walk, and you see there is some truth in
it."--"Truce with your impertinence, Jeckols!" replied my protector:
"this is no proper occasion for a joke. Answer me, Gines, were you the
cause of this young man being left naked and wounded this bitter morning
upon the forest?"

"Mayhap I was. What then?"

"What provocation could induce you to so cruel a treatment?"

"Provocation enough. He had no money."

"What, did you use him thus, without so much as being irritated by any
resistance on his part?"

"Yes, he did resist. I only hustled him, and he had the impudence to
strike me."

"Gines! you are an incorrigible fellow."

"Pooh, what signifies what I am? You, with your compassion, and your
fine feelings, will bring us all to the gallows."

"I have nothing to say to you; I have no hopes of you! Comrades, it is
for you to decide upon the conduct of this man as you think proper. You
know how repeated his offences have been; you know what pains I have
taken to mend him. Our profession is the profession of justice." [It is
thus that the prejudices of men universally teach them to colour the
most desperate cause to which they have determined to adhere.] "We, who
are thieves without a licence, are at open war with another set of men
who are thieves according to law. With such a cause then to bear us out,
shall we stain it with cruelty, malice, and revenge? A thief is, of
course, a man living among his equals; I do not pretend therefore to
assume any authority among you; act as you think proper; but, so far as
relates to myself, I vote that Gines be expelled from among us as a
disgrace to our society."

This proposition seemed to meet the general sense. It was easy to
perceive that the opinion of the rest coincided with that of their
leader; notwithstanding which a few of them hesitated as to the conduct
to be pursued. In the mean time Gines muttered something in a surly and
irresolute way, about taking care how they provoked him. This
insinuation instantly roused the courage of my protector, and his eyes
flashed with contempt.

"Rascal!" said he, "do you menace us? Do you think we will be your
slaves? No, no, do your worst! Go to the next justice of the peace, and
impeach us; I can easily believe you are capable of it. Sir, when we
entered into this gang, we were not such fools as not to know that we
entered upon a service of danger. One of its dangers consists in the
treachery of fellows like you. But we did not enter at first to flinch
now. Did you believe that we would live in hourly fear of you, tremble
at your threats, and compromise, whenever you should so please, with
your insolence? That would be a blessed life indeed! I would rather see
my flesh torn piecemeal from my bones! Go, sir! I defy you! You dare not
do it! You dare not sacrifice these gallant fellows to your rage, and
publish yourself to all the world a traitor and a scoundrel! If you do,
you will punish yourself, not us! Begone!"

The intrepidity of the leader communicated itself to the rest of the
company. Gines easily saw that there was no hope of bringing them over
to a contrary sentiment. After a short pause, he answered, "I did not
mean--No, damn it! I will not snivel neither. I was always true to my
principles, and a friend to you all. But since you are resolved to turn
me out, why--good bye to you!"

The expulsion of this man produced a remarkable improvement in the whole
gang. Those who were before inclined to humanity, assumed new energy in
proportion as they saw such sentiments likely to prevail. They had
before suffered themselves to be overborne by the boisterous insolence
of their antagonist; but now they adopted, and with success, a different
conduct. Those who envied the ascendancy of their comrade, and therefore
imitated his conduct, began to hesitate in their career. Stories were
brought forward of the cruelty and brutality of Gines both to men and
animals, which had never before reached the ear of the leader. The
stories I shall not repeat. They could excite only emotions of
abhorrence and disgust; and some of them argued a mind of such a stretch
of depravity, as to many readers would appear utterly incredible; and
yet this man had his virtues. He was enterprising, persevering, and
faithful.

His removal was a considerable benefit to me. It would have been no
small hardship to have been turned adrift immediately under my
unfavourable circumstances, with the additional disadvantage of the
wound I had received; and yet I could scarcely have ventured to remain
under the same roof with a man, to whom my appearance was as a guilty
conscience, perpetually reminding him of his own offence, and the
displeasure of his leader. His profession accustomed him to a certain
degree of indifference to consequences, and indulgence to the sallies of
passion; and he might easily have found his opportunity to insult or
injure me, when I should have had nothing but my own debilitated
exertions to protect me.

Freed from this danger, I found my situation sufficiently fortunate for
a man under my circumstances. It was attended with all the advantages
for concealment my fondest imagination could have hoped; and it was by
no means destitute of the benefits which arise from kindness and
humanity. Nothing could be more unlike than the thieves I had seen
in ---- jail, and the thieves of my new residence. The latter were
generally full of cheerfulness and merriment. They could expatiate
freely wherever they thought proper. They could form plans and execute
them. They consulted their inclinations. They did not impose upon
themselves the task, as is too often the case in human society, of
seeming tacitly to approve that from which they suffered most; or, which
is worst, of persuading themselves that all the wrongs they suffered
were right; but were at open war with their oppressors. On the contrary,
the imprisoned felons I had lately seen were shut up like wild beasts in
a cage, deprived of activity, and palsied with indolence. The occasional
demonstrations that still remained of their former enterprising life
were the starts and convulsions of disease, not the meditated and
consistent exertions of a mind in health. They had no more of hope, of
project, of golden and animated dreams, but were reserved to the most
dismal prospects, and forbidden to think upon any other topic. It is
true, that these two scenes were parts of one whole, the one the
consummation, the hourly to be expected successor of the other. But the
men I now saw were wholly inattentive to this, and in that respect
appeared to hold no commerce with reflection or reason.

I might in one view, as I have said, congratulate myself upon my present
residence; it answered completely the purposes of concealment. It was
the seat of merriment and hilarity; but the hilarity that characterised
it produced no correspondent feelings in my bosom. The persons who
composed this society had each of them cast off all control from
established principle; their trade was terror, and their constant object
to elude the vigilance of the community. The influence of these
circumstances was visible in their character. I found among them
benevolence and kindness: they were strongly susceptible of emotions of
generosity. But, as their situation was precarious, their dispositions
were proportionably fluctuating. Inured to the animosity of their
species, they were irritable and passionate. Accustomed to exercise
harshness towards the subject of their depredations, they did not always
confine their brutality within that scope. They were habituated to
consider wounds and bludgeons and stabbing as the obvious mode of
surmounting every difficulty. Uninvolved in the debilitating routine of
human affairs, they frequently displayed an energy which, from every
impartial observer, would have extorted veneration. Energy is perhaps of
all qualities the most valuable; and a just political system would
possess the means of extracting from it, thus circumstanced, its
beneficial qualities, instead of consigning it, as now, to
indiscriminate destruction. We act like the chemist, who should reject
the finest ore, and employ none but what was sufficiently debased to fit
it immediately for the vilest uses. But the energy of these men, such as
I beheld it, was in the highest degree misapplied, unassisted by liberal
and enlightened views, and directed only to the most narrow and
contemptible purposes.

The residence I have been describing might to many persons have appeared
attended with intolerable inconveniences. But, exclusively of its
advantages as a field for speculation, it was Elysium, compared with
that from which I had just escaped. Displeasing company, incommodious
apartments, filthiness, and riot, lost the circumstance by which they
could most effectually disgust, when I was not compelled to remain with
them. All hardships I could patiently endure, in comparison with the
menace of a violent and untimely death. There was no suffering that I
could not persuade myself to consider as trivial, except that which
flowed from the tyranny, the frigid precaution, or the inhuman revenge
of my own species.

My recovery advanced in the most favourable manner. The attention and
kindness of my protector were incessant, and the rest caught the spirit
from his example. The old woman who superintended the household still
retained her animosity. She considered me as the cause of the expulsion
of Gines from the fraternity. Gines had been the object of her
particular partiality; and, zealous as she was for the public concern,
she thought an old and experienced sinner for a raw probationer but an
ill exchange. Add to which, that her habits inclined her to moroseness
and discontent, and that persons of her complexion seem unable to exist
without some object upon which to pour out the superfluity of their
gall. She lost no opportunity, upon the most trifling occasion, of
displaying her animosity; and ever and anon eyed me with a furious
glance of canine hunger for my destruction. Nothing was more evidently
mortifying to her, than the procrastination of her malice; nor could she
bear to think that a fierceness so gigantic and uncontrollable should
show itself in nothing more terrific than the pigmy spite of a
chambermaid. For myself, I had been accustomed to the warfare of
formidable adversaries, and the encounter of alarming dangers; and what
I saw of her spleen had not power sufficient to disturb my tranquillity.

As I recovered, I told my story, except so far as related to the
detection of Mr. Falkland's eventful secret, to my protector. That
particular I could not, as yet, prevail upon myself to disclose, even in
a situation like this, which seemed to preclude the possibility of its
being made use of to the disadvantage of my persecutor. My present
auditor however, whose habits of thinking were extremely opposite to
those of Mr. Forester, did not, from the obscurity which flowed from
this reserve, deduce any unfavourable conclusion. His penetration was
such, as to afford little room for an impostor to hope to mislead him by
a fictitious statement, and he confided in that penetration. So
confiding, the simplicity and integrity of my manner carried conviction
to his mind, and insured his good opinion and friendship.

He listened to my story with eagerness, and commented on the several
parts as I related them. He said, that this was only one fresh instance
of the tyranny and perfidiousness exercised by the powerful members of
the community, against those who were less privileged than themselves.
Nothing could be more clear, than their readiness to sacrifice the human
species at large to their meanest interest, or wildest caprice. Who that
saw the situation in its true light would wait till their oppressors
thought fit to decree their destruction, and not take arms in their
defence while it was yet in their power? Which was most meritorious,
the unresisting and dastardly submission of a slave, or the enterprise
and gallantry of the man who dared to assert his claims? Since, by the
partial administration of our laws, innocence, when power was armed
against it, had nothing better to hope for than guilt, what man of true
courage would fail to set these laws at defiance, and, if he must suffer
by their injustice, at least take care that he had first shown his
contempt of their yoke? For himself, he should certainly never have
embraced his present calling, had he not been stimulated to it by these
cogent and irresistible reasons; and he hoped, as experience had so
forcibly brought a conviction of this sort to my mind, that he should
for the future have the happiness to associate me to his pursuits.--It
will presently be seen with what event these hopes were attended.

Numerous were the precautions exercised by the gang of thieves with whom
I now resided, to elude the vigilance of the satellites of justice. It
was one of their rules to commit no depredations but at a considerable
distance from the place of their residence; and Gines had transgressed
this regulation in the attack to which I was indebted for my present
asylum. After having possessed themselves of any booty, they took care,
in the sight of the persons whom they had robbed, to pursue a route as
nearly as possible opposite to that which led to their true haunts. The
appearance of their place of residence, together with its environs, was
peculiarly desolate and forlorn, and it had the reputation of being
haunted. The old woman I have described had long been its inhabitant,
and was commonly supposed to be its only inhabitant; and her person well
accorded with the rural ideas of a witch. Her lodgers never went out or
came in but with the utmost circumspection, and generally by night. The
lights which were occasionally seen from various parts of her
habitation, were, by the country people, regarded with horror as
supernatural; and if the noise of revelry at any time saluted their
ears, it was imagined to proceed from a carnival of devils. With all
these advantages, the thieves did not venture to reside here but by
intervals: they frequently absented themselves for months, and removed
to a different part of the country. The old woman sometimes attended
them in these transportations, and sometimes remained; but in all cases
her decampment took place either sooner or later than theirs, so that
the nicest observer could scarcely have traced any connection between
her reappearance, and the alarms of depredation that were frequently
given; and the festival of demons seemed, to the terrified rustics,
indifferently to take place whether she were present or absent.




CHAPTER III.


One day, while I continued in this situation, a circumstance occurred
which involuntarily attracted my attention. Two of our people had been
sent to a town at some distance, for the purpose of procuring us the
things of which we were in want. After having delivered these to our
landlady, they retired to one corner of the room; and, one of them
pulling a printed paper from his pocket, they mutually occupied
themselves in examining its contents. I was sitting in an easy chair by
the fire, being considerably better than I had been, though still in a
weak and languid state. Having read for a considerable time, they looked
at me, and then at the paper, and then at me again. They then went out
of the room together, as if to consult without interruption upon
something which that paper suggested to them. Some time after they
returned; and my protector, who had been absent upon the former
occasion, entered the room at the same instant.

"Captain!" said one of them with an air of pleasure, "look here! we have
found a prize! I believe it is as good as a bank-note of a hundred
guineas."

Mr. Raymond (that was his name) took the paper, and read. He paused for
a moment. He then crushed the paper in his hand; and, turning to the
person from whom he had received it, said, with the tone of a man
confident in the success of his reasons,--

"What use have you for these hundred guineas? Are you in want? Are you
in distress? Can you be contented to purchase them at the price of
treachery--of violating the laws of hospitality?"

"Faith, captain, I do not very well know. After having violated other
laws, I do not see why we should be frightened at an old saw. We pretend
to judge for ourselves, and ought to be above shrinking from a bugbear
of a proverb. Beside, this is a good deed, and I should think no more
harm of being the ruin of such a thief than of getting my dinner."

"A thief! You talk of thieves!"

"Not so fast, captain. God defend that I should say a word against
thieving as a general occupation! But one man steals in one way, and
another in another. For my part, I go upon the highway, and take from
any stranger I meet what, it is a hundred to one, he can very well
spare. I see nothing to be found fault with in that. But I have as much
conscience as another man. Because I laugh at assizes, and great wigs,
and the gallows, and because I will not be frightened from an innocent
action when the lawyers say me nay, does it follow that I am to have a
fellow-feeling for pilferers, and rascally servants, and people that
have neither justice nor principle? No; I have too much respect for the
trade not to be a foe to interlopers, and people that so much the more
deserve my hatred, because the world calls them by my name."

"You are wrong, Larkins! You certainly ought not to employ against
people that you hate, supposing your hatred to be reasonable, the
instrumentality of that law which in your practice you defy. Be
consistent. Either be the friend of the law, or its adversary. Depend
upon it that, wherever there are laws at all, there will be laws against
such people as you and me. Either therefore we all of us deserve the
vengeance of the law, or law is not the proper instrument for correcting
the misdeeds of mankind. I tell you this, because I would fain have you
aware, that an informer or a king's evidence, a man who takes advantage
of the confidence of another in order to betray him, who sells the life
of his neighbour for money, or, coward-like, upon any pretence calls in
the law to do that for him which he cannot or dares not do for himself,
is the vilest of rascals. But in the present case, if your reasons were
the best in the world, they do not apply."

While Mr. Raymond was speaking, the rest of the gang came into the room.
He immediately turned to them, and said,--

"My friends, here is a piece of intelligence that Larkins has just
brought in which, with his leave, I will lay before you."

Then unfolding the paper he had received, he continued: "This is the
description of a felon, with the offer of a hundred guineas for his
apprehension. Larking picked it up at ----. By the time and other
circumstances, but particularly by the minute description of his
person, there can be no doubt but the object of it is our young friend,
whose life I was a while ago the instrument of saving. He is charged
here with having taken advantage of the confidence of his patron and
benefactor to rob him of property to a large amount. Upon this charge he
was committed to the county jail, from whence he made his escape about a
fortnight ago, without venturing to stand his trial; a circumstance
which is stated by the advertiser as tantamount to a confession of his
guilt.

"My friends, I was acquainted with the particulars of this story some
time before. This lad let me into his history, at a time that he could
not possibly foresee that he should stand in need of that precaution as
an antidote against danger. He is not guilty of what is laid to his
charge. Which of you is so ignorant as to suppose, that his escape is
any confirmation of his guilt? Who ever thinks, when he is apprehended
for trial, of his innocence or guilt as being at all material to the
issue? Who ever was fool enough to volunteer a trial, where those who
are to decide think more of the horror of the thing of which he is
accused, than whether he were the person that did it; and where the
nature of our motives is to be collected from a set of ignorant
witnesses, that no wise man would trust for a fair representation of the
most indifferent action of his life?

"The poor lad's story is a long one, and I will not trouble you with it
now. But from that story it is as clear as the day, that, because he
wished to leave the service of his master, because he had been perhaps a
little too inquisitive in his master's concerns, and because, as I
suspect, he had been trusted with some important secrets, his master
conceived an antipathy against him. The antipathy gradually proceeded
to such a length, as to induce the master to forge this vile accusation.
He seemed willing to hang the lad out of the way, rather than suffer him
to go where he pleased, or get beyond the reach of his power. Williams
has told me the story with such ingenuousness, that I am as sure that he
is guiltless of what they lay to his charge, as that I am so myself.
Nevertheless the man's servants who were called in to hear the
accusation, and his relation, who as justice of the peace made out the
mittimus, and who had the folly to think he could be impartial, gave it
on his side with one voice, and thus afforded Williams a sample of what
he had to expect in the sequel.

"Larkins, who when he received this paper had no previous knowledge of
particulars, was for taking advantage of it for the purpose of earning
the hundred guineas. Are you of that mind now you have heard them? Will
you for so paltry a consideration deliver up the lamb into the jaws of
the wolf? Will you abet the purposes of this sanguinary rascal, who, not
contented with driving his late dependent from house and home, depriving
him of character and all the ordinary means of subsistence, and leaving
him almost without a refuge, still thirsts for his blood? If no other
person have the courage to set limits to the tyranny of courts of
justice, shall not we? Shall we, who earn our livelihood by generous
daring, be indebted for a penny to the vile artifices of the informer?
Shall we, against whom the whole species is in arms, refuse our
protection to an individual, more exposed to, but still less deserving
of, their persecution than ourselves?"

The representation of the captain produced an instant effect upon the
whole company. They all exclaimed, "Betray him! No, not for worlds! He
is safe. We will protect him at the hazard of our lives. If fidelity
and honour be banished from thieves, where shall they find refuge upon
the face of the earth?"[F] Larkins in particular thanked the captain for
his interference, and swore that he would rather part with his right
hand than injure so worthy a lad or assist such an unheard-of villainy.
Saying this, he took me by the hand and bade me fear nothing. Under
their roof no harm should ever befal me; and, even if the understrappers
of the law should discover my retreat, they would to a man die in my
defence, sooner than a hair of my head should be hurt. I thanked him
most sincerely for his good-will; but I was principally struck with the
fervent benevolence of my benefactor. I told them, I found that my
enemies were inexorable, and would never be appeased but with my blood;
and I assured them with the most solemn and earnest veracity, that I had
done nothing to deserve the persecution which was exercised against me.

[Footnote F: This seems to be the parody of a celebrated saying of John
King of France, who was taken prisoner by the Black Prince at the battle
of Poitiers.]

The spirit and energy of Mr. Raymond had been such as to leave no part
for me to perform in repelling this unlooked-for danger. Nevertheless,
it left a very serious impression upon my mind. I had always placed some
confidence in the returning equity of Mr. Falkland. Though he persecuted
me with bitterness, I could not help believing that he did it
unwillingly, and I was persuaded it would not be for ever. A man, whose
original principles had been so full of rectitude and honour, could not
fail at some time to recollect the injustice of his conduct, and to
remit his asperity. This idea had been always present to me, and had in
no small degree conspired to instigate my exertions. I said, "I will
convince my persecutor that I am of more value than that I should be
sacrificed purely by way of precaution." These expectations on my part
had been encouraged by Mr. Falkland's behaviour upon the question of my
imprisonment, and by various particulars which had occurred since.

But this new incident gave the subject a totally different appearance. I
saw him, not contented with blasting my reputation, confining me for a
period in jail, and reducing me to the situation of a houseless
vagabond, still continuing his pursuit under these forlorn circumstances
with unmitigable cruelty. Indignation and resentment seemed now for the
first time to penetrate my mind. I knew his misery so well, I was so
fully acquainted with its cause, and strongly impressed with the idea of
its being unmerited, that, while I suffered deeply, I still continued to
pity, rather than hate my persecutor. But this incident introduced some
change into my feelings. I said, "Surely he might now believe that he
had sufficiently disarmed me, and might at length suffer me to be at
peace. At least, ought he not to be contented to leave me to my fate,
the perilous and uncertain condition of an escaped felon, instead of
thus whetting the animosity and vigilance of my countrymen against me?
Were his interference on my behalf in opposition to the stern severity
of Mr. Forester, and his various acts of kindness since, a mere part
that he played in order to lull me into patience? Was he perpetually
haunted with the fear of an ample retaliation, and for that purpose did
he personate remorse, at the very moment that he was secretly keeping
every engine at play that could secure my destruction?" The very
suspicion of such a fact filled me with inexpressible horror, and
struck a sudden chill through every fibre of my frame.

My wound was by this time completely healed, and it became absolutely
necessary that I should form some determination respecting the future.
My habits of thinking were such as gave me an uncontrollable repugnance
to the vocation of my hosts. I did not indeed feel that aversion and
abhorrence to the men which are commonly entertained. I saw and
respected their good qualities and their virtues. I was by no means
inclined to believe them worse men, or more hostile in their
dispositions to the welfare of their species, than the generality of
those that look down upon them with most censure. But, though I did not
cease to love them as individuals, my eyes were perfectly open to their
mistakes. If I should otherwise have been in danger of being misled, it
was my fortune to have studied felons in a jail before I studied them in
their state of comparative prosperity; and this was an infallible
antidote to the poison. I saw that in this profession were exerted
uncommon energy, ingenuity, and fortitude, and I could not help
recollecting how admirably beneficial such qualities might be made in
the great theatre of human affairs; while, in their present direction,
they were thrown away upon purposes diametrically at war with the first
interests of human society. Nor were their proceedings less injurious to
their own interest than incompatible with the general welfare. The man
who risks or sacrifices his life for the public cause, is rewarded with
the testimony of an approving conscience; but persons who wantonly defy
the necessary, though atrociously exaggerated, precautions of government
in the matter of property, at the same time that they commit an
alarming hostility against the whole, are, as to their own concerns,
scarcely less absurd and self-neglectful than the man who should set
himself up as a mark for a file of musqueteers to shoot at.

Viewing the subject in this light, I not only determined that I would
have no share in their occupation myself, but thought I could not do
less, in return for the benefits I had received from them, than
endeavour to dissuade them from an employment in which they must
themselves be the greatest sufferers. My expostulation met with a
various reception. All the persons to whom it was addressed had been
tolerably successful in persuading themselves of the innocence of their
calling; and what remained of doubt in their mind was smothered, and, so
to speak, laboriously forgotten. Some of them laughed at my arguments,
as a ridiculous piece of missionary quixotism. Others, and particularly
our captain, repelled them with the boldness of a man that knows he has
got the strongest side. But this sentiment of ease and self-satisfaction
did not long remain. They had been used to arguments derived from
religion and the sacredness of law. They had long ago shaken these from
them as so many prejudices. But my view of the subject appealed to
principles which they could not contest, and had by no means the air of
that customary reproof which is for ever dinned in our ears without
finding one responsive chord in our hearts. Urged, as they now were,
with objections unexpected and cogent, some of those to whom I addressed
them began to grow peevish and impatient of the intrusive remonstrance.
But this was by no means the case with Mr. Raymond. He was possessed of
a candour that I have seldom seen equalled. He was surprised to hear
objections so powerful to that which, as a matter of speculation, he
believed he had examined on all sides. He revolved them with
impartiality and care. He admitted them slowly, but he at length fully
admitted them. He had now but one rejoinder in reserve.

"Alas! Williams," said he, "it would have been fortunate for me if these
views had been presented to me, previously to my embracing my present
profession. It is now too late. Those very laws which, by a perception
of their iniquity, drove me to what I am, preclude my return. God, we
are told, judges of men by what they are at the period of arraignment,
and whatever be their crimes, if they have seen and abjured the folly of
those crimes, receives them to favour. But the institutions of countries
that profess to worship this God admit no such distinctions. They leave
no room for amendment, and seem to have a brutal delight in confounding
the demerits of offenders. It signifies not what is the character of the
individual at the hour of trial. How changed, how spotless, and how
useful, avails him nothing. If they discover at the distance of
fourteen[G] or of forty years[H] an action for which the law ordains
that his life shall be the forfeit, though the interval should have been
spent with the purity of a saint and the devotedness of a patriot, they
disdain to enquire into it. What then can I do? Am I not compelled to go
on in folly, having once begun?"

[Footnote G: Eugene Aram. See Annual Register for 1759.]

[Footnote H: William Andrew Home. Ibid.]




CHAPTER IV.


I Was extremely affected by this plea. I could only answer, that Mr.
Raymond must himself be the best judge of the course it became him to
hold; I trusted the case was not so desperate as he imagined.

This subject was pursued no further, and was in some degree driven from
my thoughts by an incident of a very extraordinary nature.

I have already mentioned the animosity that was entertained against me
by the infernal portress of this solitary mansion. Gines, the expelled
member of the gang, had been her particular favourite. She submitted to
his exile indeed, because her genius felt subdued by the energy and
inherent superiority of Mr. Raymond; but she submitted with murmuring
and discontent. Not daring to resent the conduct of the principal in
this affair, she collected all the bitterness of her spirit against me.

To the unpardonable offence I had thus committed in the first instance,
were added the reasonings I had lately offered against the profession of
robbery. Robbery was a fundamental article in the creed of this hoary
veteran, and she listened to my objections with the same unaffected
astonishment and horror that an old woman of other habits would listen
to one who objected to the agonies and dissolution of the Creator of the
world, or to the garment of imputed righteousness prepared to envelope
the souls of the elect. Like the religious bigot, she was sufficiently
disposed to avenge a hostility against her opinions with the weapons of
sublunary warfare.

Meanwhile I had smiled at the impotence of her malice, as an object of
contempt rather than alarm. She perceived, as I imagine, the slight
estimation in which I held her, and this did not a little increase the
perturbation of her thoughts.

One day I was left alone, with no other person in the house than this
swarthy sybil. The thieves had set out upon an expedition about two
hours after sunset on the preceding evening, and had not returned, as
they were accustomed to do, before day-break the next morning. This was
a circumstance that sometimes occurred, and therefore did not produce
any extraordinary alarm. At one time the scent of prey would lead them
beyond the bounds they had prescribed themselves, and at another the
fear of pursuit: the life of a thief is always uncertain. The old woman
had been preparing during the night for the meal to which they would
expect to sit down as soon as might be after their return.

For myself, I had learned from their habits to be indifferent to the
regular return of the different parts of the day, and in some degree to
turn day into night, and night into day. I had been now several weeks in
this residence, and the season was considerably advanced. I had passed
some hours during the night in ruminating on my situation. The character
and manners of the men among whom I lived were disgusting to me. Their
brutal ignorance, their ferocious habits, and their coarse behaviour,
instead of becoming more tolerable by custom, hourly added force to my
original aversion. The uncommon vigour of their minds, and acuteness of
their invention in the business they pursued, compared with the
odiousness of that business and their habitual depravity, awakened in me
sensations too painful to be endured. Moral disapprobation, at least in
a mind unsubdued by philosophy, I found to be one of the most fertile
sources of disquiet and uneasiness. From this pain the society of Mr.
Raymond by no means relieved me. He was indeed eminently superior to the
vices of the rest; but I did not less exquisitely feel how much he was
out of his place, how disproportionably associated, or how contemptibly
employed. I had attempted to counteract the errors under which he and
his companions laboured; but I had found the obstacles that presented
themselves greater than I had imagined.

What was I to do? Was I to wait the issue of this my missionary
undertaking, or was I to withdraw myself immediately? When I withdrew,
ought that to be done privately, or with an open avowal of my design,
and an endeavour to supply by the force of example what was deficient in
my arguments? It was certainly improper, as I declined all participation
in the pursuits of these men, did not pay my contribution of hazard to
the means by which they subsisted, and had no congeniality with their
habits, that I should continue to reside with them longer than was
absolutely necessary. There was one circumstance that rendered this
deliberation particularly pressing. They intended in a few days removing
from their present habitation, to a haunt to which they were accustomed,
in a distant county. If I did not propose to continue with them, it
would perhaps be wrong to accompany them in this removal. The state of
calamity to which my inexorable prosecutor had reduced me, had made the
encounter even of a den of robbers a fortunate adventure. But the time
that had since elapsed, had probably been sufficient to relax the
keenness of the quest that was made after me. I sighed for that solitude
and obscurity, that retreat from the vexations of the world and the
voice even of common fame, which I had proposed to myself when I broke
my prison.

Such were the meditations which now occupied my mind. At length I grew
fatigued with continual contemplation, and to relieve myself pulled out
a pocket Horace, the legacy of my beloved Brightwel! I read with avidity
the epistle in which he so beautifully describes to Fuscus, the
grammarian, the pleasures of rural tranquillity and independence. By
this time the sun rose from behind the eastern hills, and I opened my
casement to contemplate it. The day commenced with peculiar brilliancy,
and was accompanied with all those charms which the poets of nature, as
they have been styled, have so much delighted to describe. There was
something in this scene, particularly as succeeding to the active
exertions of intellect, that soothed the mind to composure. Insensibly a
confused reverie invaded my faculties; I withdrew from the window, threw
myself upon the bed, and fell asleep.

I do not recollect the precise images which in this situation passed
through my thoughts, but I know that they concluded with the idea of
some person, the agent of Mr. Falkland, approaching to assassinate me.
This thought had probably been suggested by the project I meditated of
entering once again into the world, and throwing myself within the
sphere of his possible vengeance. I imagined that the design of the
murderer was to come upon me by surprise, that I was aware of his
design, and yet, by some fascination, had no thought of evading it. I
heard the steps of the murderer as he cautiously approached. I seemed to
listen to his constrained yet audible breathings. He came up to the
corner where I was placed, and then stopped.

The idea became too terrible; I started, opened my eyes, and beheld the
execrable hag before mentioned standing over me with a butcher's
cleaver. I shifted my situation with a speed that seemed too swift for
volition, and the blow already aimed at my skull sunk impotent upon the
bed. Before she could wholly recover her posture, I sprung upon her,
seized hold of the weapon, and had nearly wrested it from her. But in a
moment she resumed her strength and her desperate purpose, and we had a
furious struggle--she impelled by inveterate malice, and I resisting for
my life. Her vigour was truly Amazonian, and at no time had I ever
occasion to contend with a more formidable opponent. Her glance was
rapid and exact, and the shock with which from time to time she impelled
her whole frame inconceivably vehement. At length I was victorious, took
from her the instrument of death, and threw her upon the ground. Till
now the earnestness of her exertions had curbed her rage; but now she
gnashed with her teeth, her eyes seemed as if starting from their
sockets, and her body heaved with uncontrollable insanity.

"Rascal! devil!" she exclaimed, "what do you mean to do to me?"

Till now the scene had passed uninterrupted by a single word.

"Nothing," I replied: "begone, infernal witch! and leave me to myself."

"Leave you! No: I will thrust my fingers through your ribs, and drink
your blood!--You conquer me?--Ha, ha!--Yes, yes; you shall!--I will sit
upon you, and press you to hell! I will roast you with brimstone, and
dash your entrails into your eyes! Ha, ha!--ha!"

Saying this, she sprung up, and prepared to attack me with redoubled
fury. I seized her hands, and compelled her to sit upon the bed. Thus
restrained, she continued to express the tumult of her thoughts by
grinning, by certain furious motions of her head, and by occasional
vehement efforts to disengage herself from my grasp. These contortions
and starts were of the nature of those fits in which the patients are
commonly supposed to need three or four persons to hold them. But I
found by experience that, under the circumstances in which I was
placed, my single strength was sufficient. The spectacle of her emotions
was inconceivably frightful. Her violence at length however began to
abate, and she became convinced of the hopelessness of the contest.

"Let me go!" said she. "Why do you hold me? I will not be held."

"I wanted you gone from the first," replied I.

"Are you contented to go now?"

"Yes, I tell you, misbegotten villain! Yes, rascal!"

I immediately loosed my hold. She flew to the door, and, holding it in
her hand, said, "I will be the death of you yet: you shall not be your
own man twenty-four hours longer!" With these words she shut the door,
and locked it upon me. An action so totally unexpected startled me.
Whither was she gone? What was it she intended? To perish by the
machinations of such a hag as this was a thought not to be endured.
Death in any form brought upon us by surprise, and for which the mind
has had no time to prepare, is inexpressibly terrible. My thoughts
wandered in breathless horror and confusion, and all within was uproar.
I endeavoured to break the door, but in vain. I went round the room in
search of some tool to assist me. At length I rushed against it with a
desperate effort, to which it yielded, and had nearly thrown me from the
top of the stairs to the bottom.

I descended with all possible caution and vigilance, I entered the room
which served us for a kitchen, but it was deserted. I searched every
other apartment in vain. I went out among the ruins; still I discovered
nothing of my late assailant. It was extraordinary: what could be become
of her? what was I to conclude from her disappearance! I reflected on
her parting menace,--"I should not be my own man twenty-four hours
longer." It was mysterious! it did not seem to be the menace of
assassination. Suddenly the recollection of the hand-bill brought to us
by Larkins rushed upon my memory. Was it possible that she alluded to
that in her parting words? Would she set out upon such an expedition by
herself? Was it not dangerous to the whole fraternity if, without the
smallest precaution, she should bring the officers of justice in the
midst of them? It was perhaps improbable she would engage in an
undertaking thus desperate. It was not however easy to answer for the
conduct of a person in her state of mind. Should I wait, and risk the
preservation of my liberty upon the issue?

To this question I returned an immediate negative. I had resolved in a
short time to quit my present situation, and the difference of a little
sooner or a little later could not be very material. It promised to be
neither agreeable nor prudent for me to remain under the same roof with
a person who had manifested such a fierce and inexpiable hostility. But
the consideration which had inexpressibly the most weight with me,
belonged to the ideas of imprisonment, trial, and death. The longer they
had formed the subject of my contemplation, the more forcibly was I
impelled to avoid them. I had entered upon a system of action for that
purpose; I had already made many sacrifices; and I believed that I would
never miscarry in this project through any neglect of mine. The thought
of what was reserved for me by my persecutors sickened my very soul; and
the more intimately I was acquainted with oppression and injustice, the
more deeply was I penetrated with the abhorrence to which they are
entitled.

Such were the reasons that determined me instantly, abruptly, without
leave-taking, or acknowledgment for the peculiar and repeated favours I
had received, to quit a habitation to which, for six weeks, I had
apparently been indebted for protection from trial, conviction, and an
ignominious death. I had come hither pennyless; I quitted my abode with
the sum of a few guineas in my possession, Mr. Raymond having insisted
upon my taking a share at the time that each man received his dividend
from the common stock. Though I had reason to suppose that the heat of
the pursuit against me would be somewhat remitted by the time that had
elapsed, the magnitude of the mischief that, in an unfavourable event,
might fall on me, determined me to neglect no imaginable precaution. I
recollected the hand-bill which was the source of my present alarm, and
conceived that one of the principal dangers which threatened me was the
recognition of my person, either by such as had previously known me, or
even by strangers. It seemed prudent therefore to disguise it as
effectually as I could. For this purpose I had recourse to a parcel of
tattered garments, that lay in a neglected corner of our habitation. The
disguise I chose was that of a beggar. Upon this plan, I threw off my
shirt; I tied a handkerchief about my head, with which I took care to
cover one of my eyes; over this I drew a piece of an old woollen
nightcap. I selected the worst apparel I could find; and this I reduced
to a still more deplorable condition, by rents that I purposely made in
various places. Thus equipped, I surveyed myself in a looking-glass. I
had rendered my appearance complete; nor would any one have suspected
that I was not one of the fraternity to which I assumed to belong. I
said, "This is the form in which tyranny and injustice oblige me to seek
for refuge: but better, a thousand times better is it, thus to incur
contempt with the dregs of mankind, than trust to the tender mercies of
our superiors!"




CHAPTER V.


The only rule that I laid down to myself in traversing the forest, was
to take a direction as opposite as possible to that which led to the
scene of my late imprisonment. After about two hours walking I arrived
at the termination of this ruder scene, and reached that part of the
country which is inclosed and cultivated. Here I sat down by the side of
a brook, and, pulling out a crust of bread which I had brought away with
me, rested and refreshed myself. While I continued in this place, I
began to ruminate upon the plan I should lay down for my future
proceedings; and my propensity now led me, as it had done in a former
instance, to fix upon the capital, which I believed, besides its other
recommendations, would prove the safest place for concealment. During
these thoughts I saw a couple of peasants passing at a small distance,
and enquired of them respecting the London road. By their description I
understood that the most immediate way would be to repass a part of the
forest, and that it would be necessary to approach considerably nearer
to the county-town than I was at the spot which I had at present
reached. I did not imagine that this could be a circumstance of
considerable importance. My disguise appeared to be a sufficient
security against momentary danger; and I therefore took a path, though
not the most direct one, which led towards the point they suggested.

Some of the occurrences of the day are deserving to be mentioned. As I
passed along a road which lay in my way for a few miles, I saw a
carriage advancing in the opposite direction. I debated with myself for
a moment, whether I should pass it without notice, or should take this
occasion, by voice or gesture, of making an essay of my trade. This idle
disquisition was however speedily driven from my mind when I perceived
that the carriage was Mr. Falkland's. The suddenness of the encounter
struck me with terror, though perhaps it would have been difficult for
calm reflection to have discovered any considerable danger. I withdrew
from the road, and skulked behind a hedge till it should have completely
gone by. I was too much occupied with my own feelings, to venture to
examine whether or no the terrible adversary of my peace were in the
carriage. I persuaded myself that he was. I looked after the equipage,
and exclaimed, "There you may see the luxurious accommodations and
appendages of guilt, and here the forlornness that awaits upon
innocence!"--I was to blame to imagine that my case was singular in that
respect. I only mention it to show how the most trivial circumstance
contributes to embitter the cup to the man of adversity. The thought
however was a transient one. I had learned this lesson from my
sufferings, not to indulge in the luxury of discontent. As my mind
recovered its tranquillity, I began to enquire whether the phenomenon I
had just seen could have any relation to myself. But though my mind was
extremely inquisitive and versatile in this respect, I could discover no
sufficient ground upon which to build a judgment.

At night I entered a little public-house at the extremity of a village,
and, seating myself in a corner of the kitchen, asked for some bread and
cheese. While I was sitting at my repast, three or four labourers came
in for a little refreshment after their work. Ideas respecting the
inequality of rank pervade every order in society; and, as my appearance
was meaner and more contemptible than theirs, I found it expedient to
give way to these gentry of a village alehouse, and remove to an
obscurer station. I was surprised, and not a little startled, to find
them fall almost immediately into conversation about my history, whom,
with a slight variation of circumstances, they styled the notorious
housebreaker, Kit Williams.

"Damn the fellow," said one of them, "one never hears of any thing else.
O' my life, I think he makes talk for the whole country."

"That is very true," replied another. "I was at the market-town to-day
to sell some oats for my master, and there was a hue and cry, some of
them thought they had got him, but it was a false alarm."

"That hundred guineas is a fine thing," rejoined the first. "I should be
glad if so be as how it fell in my way."

"For the matter of that," said his companion, "I should like a hundred
guineas as well as another. But I cannot be of your mind for all that. I
should never think money would do me any good that had been the means of
bringing a Christian creature to the gallows."

"Poh, that is all my granny! Some folks must be hanged, to keep the
wheels of our state-folks a-going. Besides, I could forgive the fellow
all his other robberies, but that he should have been so hardened as to
break the house of his own master at last, that is too bad."

"Lord! lord!" replied the other, "I see you know nothing of the matter!
I will tell you how it was, as I learned it at the town. I question
whether he ever robbed his master at all. But, hark you! you must know
as how that squire Falkland was once tried for murder"--

"Yes, yes, we know that."

"Well, he was as innocent as the child unborn. But I supposes as how he
is a little soft or so. And so Kit Williams--Kit is a devilish cunning
fellow, you may judge that from his breaking prison no less than five
times,--so, I say, he threatened to bring his master to trial at
'size all over again, and so frightened him, and got money from him at
divers times. Till at last one squire Forester, a relation of t'other,
found it all out. And he made the hell of a rumpus, and sent away Kit to
prison in a twinky; and I believe he would have been hanged: for when
two squires lay their heads together, they do not much matter law, you
know; or else they twist the law to their own ends, I cannot exactly say
which; but it is much at one when the poor fellow's breath is out of his
body."

Though this story was very circumstantially told, and with a sufficient
detail of particulars, it did not pass unquestioned. Each man maintained
the justness of his own statement, and the dispute was long and
obstinately pursued. Historians and commentators at length withdrew
together. The terrors with which I was seized when this conversation
began, were extreme. I stole a sidelong glance to one quarter and
another, to observe if any man's attention was turned upon me. I
trembled as if in an ague-fit; and, at first, felt continual impulses to
quit the house, and take to my heels. I drew closer to my corner, held
aside my head, and seemed from time to time to undergo a total
revolution of the animal economy.

At length the tide of ideas turned. Perceiving they paid no attention to
me, the recollection of the full security my disguise afforded recurred
strongly to my thoughts; and I began inwardly to exult, though I did not
venture to obtrude myself to examination. By degrees I began to be
amused at the absurdity of their tales, and the variety of the
falsehoods I heard asserted around me. My soul seemed to expand; I felt
a pride in the self-possession and lightness of heart with which I could
listen to the scene; and I determined to prolong and heighten the
enjoyment. Accordingly, when they were withdrawn, I addressed myself to
our hostess, a buxom, bluff, good-humoured widow, and asked what sort of
a man this Kit Williams might be? She replied that, as she was informed,
he was as handsome, likely a lad, as any in four counties round; and
that she loved him for his cleverness, by which he outwitted all the
keepers they could set over him, and made his way through stone walls as
if they were so many cobwebs. I observed, that the country was so
thoroughly alarmed, that I did not think it possible he should escape
the pursuit that was set up after him. This idea excited her immediate
indignation: she said, she hoped he was far enough away by this time;
but if not, she wished the curse of God might light on them that
betrayed so noble a fellow to an ignominious end!--Though she little
thought that the person of whom she spoke was so near her, yet the
sincere and generous warmth with which She interested herself in my
behalf gave me considerable pleasure. With this sensation to sweeten the
fatigues of the day and the calamities of my situation, I retired from
the kitchen to a neighbouring barn, laid myself down upon some straw,
and fell into a profound sleep.

The next day about noon, as I was pursuing my journey, I was overtaken
by two men on horseback, who stopped me, to enquire respecting a person
that they supposed might have passed along that road. As they proceeded
in their description, I perceived, with astonishment and terror, that I
was myself the person to whom their questions related. They entered into
a tolerably accurate detail of the various characteristics by which my
person might best be distinguished. They said, they had good reason to
believe that I had been seen at a place in that county the very day
before. While they were speaking a third person, who had fallen behind,
came up; and my alarm was greatly increased upon seeing that this person
was the servant of Mr. Forester, who had visited me in prison about a
fortnight before my escape. My best resource in this crisis was
composure and apparent indifference. It was fortunate for me that my
disguise was so complete, that the eye of Mr. Falkland itself could
scarcely have penetrated it. I had been aware for some time before that
this was a refuge which events might make necessary, and had endeavoured
to arrange and methodise my ideas upon the subject. From my youth I had
possessed a considerable facility in the art of imitation; and when I
quitted my retreat in the habitation of Mr. Raymond, I adopted, along
with my beggar's attire, a peculiar slouching and clownish gait, to be
used whenever there should appear the least chance of my being observed,
together with an Irish brogue which I had had an opportunity of studying
in my prison. Such are the miserable expedients, and so great the
studied artifice, which man, who never deserves the name of manhood but
in proportion as he is erect and independent, may find it necessary to
employ, for the purpose of eluding the inexorable animosity and
unfeeling tyranny of his fellow man! I had made use of this brogue,
though I have not thought it necessary to write it down in my narrative,
in the conversation of the village alehouse. Mr. Forester's servant, as
he came up, observed that his companions were engaged in conversation
with me; and, guessing at the subject, asked whether they had gained any
intelligence. He added to the information at which they had already
hinted, that a resolution was taken to spare neither diligence nor
expense for my discovery and apprehension, and that they were satisfied,
if I were above ground and in the kingdom, it would be impossible for me
to escape them.

Every new incident that had occurred to me tended to impress upon my
mind the extreme danger to which I was exposed. I could almost have
imagined that I was the sole subject of general attention, and that the
whole world was in arms to exterminate me. The very idea tingled through
every fibre of my frame. But, terrible as it appeared to my imagination,
it did but give new energy to my purpose; and I determined that I would
not voluntarily resign the field, that is, literally speaking, my neck
to the cord of the executioner, notwithstanding the greatest superiority
in my assailants. But the incidents which had befallen me, though they
did not change my purpose, induced me to examine over again the means by
which it might be effected. The consequence of this revisal was, to
determine me to bend my course to the nearest sea-port on the west side
of the island, and transport myself to Ireland. I cannot now tell what
it was that inclined me to prefer this scheme to that which I had
originally formed. Perhaps the latter, which had been for some time
present to my imagination, for that reason appeared the more obvious of
the two; and I found an appearance of complexity, which the mind did not
stay to explain, in substituting the other in its stead.

I arrived without further impediment at the place from which I intended
to sail, enquired for a vessel, which I found ready to put to sea in a
few hours, and agreed with the captain for my passage. Ireland had to
me the disadvantage of being a dependency of the British government, and
therefore a place of less security than most other countries which are
divided from it by the ocean. To judge from the diligence with which I
seemed to be pursued in England, it was not improbable that the zeal of
my persecutors might follow me to the other side of the channel. It was
however sufficiently agreeable to my mind, that I was upon the point of
being removed one step further from the danger which was so grievous to
my imagination.

Could there be any peril in the short interval that was to elapse,
before the vessel was to weigh anchor and quit the English shore?
Probably not. A very short time had intervened between my determination
for the sea and my arrival at this place; and if any new alarm had been
given to my prosecutors, it proceeded from the old woman a very few days
before. I hoped I had anticipated their diligence. Meanwhile, that I
might neglect no reasonable precaution, I went instantly on board,
resolved that I would not unnecessarily, by walking the streets of the
town, expose myself to any untoward accident. This was the first time I
had, upon any occasion, taken leave of my native country.




CHAPTER VI.


The time was now nearly elapsed that was prescribed for our stay, and
orders for weighing anchor were every moment expected, when we were
hailed by a boat from the shore, with two other men in it besides those
that rowed. They entered our vessel in an instant. They were officers
of justice. The passengers, five persons besides myself, were ordered
upon deck for examination. I was inexpressibly disturbed at the
occurrence of such a circumstance in so unseasonable a moment. I took it
for granted that it was of me they were in search. Was it possible that,
by any unaccountable accident, they should have got an intimation of my
disguise? It was infinitely more distressing to encounter them upon this
narrow stage, and under these pointed circumstances, than, as I had
before encountered my pursuers, under the appearance of an indifferent
person. My recollection however did not forsake me. I confided in my
conscious disguise and my Irish brogue, as a rock of dependence against
all accidents.

No sooner did we appear upon deck than, to my great consternation, I
could observe the attention of our guests principally turned upon me.
They asked a few frivolous questions of such of my fellow passengers as
happened to be nearest to them; and then, turning to me, enquired my
name, who I was, whence I came, and what had brought me there? I had
scarcely opened my mouth to reply, when, with one consent, they laid
hold of me, said I was their prisoner, and declared that my accent,
together with the correspondence of my person, would be sufficient to
convict me before any court in England. I was hurried out of the vessel
into the boat in which they came, and seated between them, as if by way
of precaution, lest I should spring overboard, and by any means escape
them.

I now took it for granted that I was once more in the power of Mr.
Falkland; and the idea was insupportably mortifying and oppressive to my
imagination. Escape from his pursuit, freedom from his tyranny, were
objects upon which my whole soul was bent. Could no human ingenuity and
exertion effect them? Did his power reach through all space, and his
eye penetrate every concealment? Was he like that mysterious being, to
protect us from whose fierce revenge mountains and hills, we are told,
might fall on us in vain? No idea is more heart-sickening and tremendous
than this. But, in my case, it was not a subject of reasoning or of
faith; I could derive no comfort, either directly from the unbelief
which, upon religious subjects, some men avow to their own minds; or
secretly from the remoteness and incomprehensibility of the conception:
it was an affair of sense; I felt the fangs of the tiger striking deep
into my heart.

But though this impression was at first exceedingly strong, and
accompanied with its usual attendants of dejection and pusillanimity, my
mind soon began, as it were mechanically, to turn upon the consideration
of the distance between this sea-port and my county prison, and the
various opportunities of escape that might offer themselves in the
interval. My first duty was to avoid betraying myself, more than it
might afterwards appear I was betrayed already. It was possible that,
though apprehended, my apprehension might have been determined on upon
some slight score, and that, by my dexterity, I might render my
dismission as sudden as my arrest had been. It was even possible that I
had been seized through a mistake, and that the present measure might
have no connection with Mr. Falkland's affair. Upon every supposition,
it was my business to gain information. In my passage from the ship to
the town I did not utter a word. My conductors commented on my
sulkiness; but remarked that it would avail me nothing--I should
infallibly swing, as it was never known that any body got off who was
tried for robbing his majesty's mail. It is difficult to conceive the
lightness of heart which was communicated to me by these words: I
persisted however in the silence I had meditated. From the rest of their
conversation, which was sufficiently voluble, I learned that the mail
from Edinburgh to London had been robbed about ten days before by two
Irishmen, that one of them was already secured, and that I was taken up
upon suspicion of being the other. They had a description of his person,
which, though, as I afterwards found, it disagreed from mine in several
material articles, appeared to them to tally to the minutest tittle. The
intelligence that the whole proceeding against me was founded in a
mistake, took an oppressive load from my mind. I believed that I should
immediately be able to establish my innocence, to the satisfaction of
any magistrate in the kingdom; and though crossed in my plans, and
thwarted in my design of quitting the island, even after I was already
at sea, this was but a trifling inconvenience compared with what I had
had but too much reason to fear.

As soon as we came ashore, I was conducted to the house of a justice of
peace, a man who had formerly been the captain of a collier, but who,
having been successful in the world, had quitted this wandering life,
and for some years had had the honour to represent his majesty's person.
We were detained for some time in a sort of anti-room, waiting his
reverence's leisure. The persons by whom I had been taken up were
experienced in their trade, and insisted upon employing this interval in
searching me, in presence of two of his worship's servants. They found
upon me fifteen guineas and some silver. They required me to strip
myself perfectly naked, that they might examine whether I had bank-notes
concealed any where about my person. They took up the detached parcels
of my miserable attire as I threw it from me, and felt them one by one,
to discover whether the articles of which they were in search might by
any device be sewn up in them. To all this I submitted without
murmuring. It might probably come to the same thing at last; and summary
justice was sufficiently coincident with my views, my principal object
being to get as soon as possible out of the clutches of the respectable
persons who now had me in custody.

This operation was scarcely completed, before we were directed to be
ushered into his worship's apartment. My accusers opened the charge, and
told him they had been ordered to this town, upon an intimation that one
of the persons who robbed the Edinburgh mail was to be found here; and
that they had taken me on board a vessel which was by this time under
sail for Ireland. "Well," says his worship, "that is your story; now let
us hear what account the gentleman gives of himself. What is your
name--ha, sirrah? and from what part of Tipperary are you pleased to
come?" I had already taken my determination upon this article; and the
moment I learned the particulars of the charge against me, resolved, for
the present at least, to lay aside my Irish accent, and speak my native
tongue. This I had done in the very few words I had spoken to my
conductors in the anti-room: they started at the metamorphosis; but they
had gone too far for it to be possible they should retract, in
consistence with their honour. I now told the justice that I was no
Irishman, nor had ever been in that country: I was a native of England.
This occasioned a consulting of the deposition in which my person was
supposed to be described, and which my conductors had brought with them
for their direction. To be sure, that required that the offender should
be an Irishman.

Observing his worship hesitate, I thought this was the time to push the
matter a little further. I referred to the paper, and showed that the
description neither tallied as to height nor complexion. But then it did
as to years and the colour of the hair; and it was not this gentleman's
habit, as he informed me, to squabble about trifles, or to let a man's
neck out of the halter for a pretended flaw of a few inches in his
stature. "If a man were too short," he said, "there was no remedy like a
little stretching." The miscalculation in my case happened to be the
opposite way, but his reverence did not think proper to lose his jest.
Upon the whole, he was somewhat at a loss how to proceed.

My conductors observed this, and began to tremble for the reward, which,
two hours ago, they thought as good as in their own pocket. To retain me
in custody they judged to be a safe speculation; if it turned out a
mistake at last, they felt little apprehension of a suit for false
imprisonment from a poor man, accoutred as I was, in rags. They
therefore urged his worship to comply with their views. They told him
that to be sure the evidence against me did not prove so strong as for
their part they heartily wished it had, but that there were a number of
suspicious circumstances respecting me. When I was brought up to them
upon the deck of the vessel, I spoke as fine an Irish brogue as one
shall hear in a summer's day; and now, all at once, there was not the
least particle of it left. In searching me they had found upon me
fifteen guineas, how should a poor beggar lad, such as I appeared, come
honestly by fifteen guineas? Besides, when they had stripped me naked,
though my dress was so shabby my skin had all the sleekness of a
gentleman. In fine, for what purpose could a poor beggar, who had never
been in Ireland in his life, want to transport himself to that country?
It was as clear as the sun that I was no better than I should be. This
reasoning, together with some significant winks and gestures between the
justice and the plaintiffs, brought him over to their way of thinking.
He said, I must go to Warwick, where it seems the other robber was at
present in custody, and be confronted with him; and if then every thing
appeared fair and satisfactory, I should be discharged.

No intelligence could be more terrible than that which was contained in
these words. That I, who had found the whole country in arms against me,
who was exposed to a pursuit so peculiarly vigilant and penetrating,
should now be dragged to the very centre of the kingdom, without power
of accommodating myself to circumstances, and under the immediate
custody of the officers of justice, seemed to my ears almost the same
thing as if he had pronounced upon me a sentence of death! I strenuously
urged the injustice of this proceeding. I observed to the magistrate,
that it was impossible I should be the person at whom the description
pointed. It required an Irishman; I was no Irishman. It described a
person shorter than I; a circumstance of all others the least capable of
being counterfeited. There was not the slightest reason for detaining me
in custody. I had been already disappointed of my voyage, and lost the
money I had paid, down, through the officiousness of these gentlemen in
apprehending me. I assured his worship, that every delay, under my
circumstances, was of the utmost importance to me. It was impossible to
devise a greater injury to be inflicted on me, than the proposal that,
instead of being permitted to proceed upon my voyage, I should be sent,
under arrest, into the heart of the kingdom.

My remonstrances were vain. The justice was by no means inclined to
digest the being expostulated with in this manner by a person in the
habiliments of a beggar. In the midst of my address he would have
silenced me for my impertinence, but that I spoke with an earnestness
with which he was wholly unable to contend. When I had finished, he told
me it was all to no purpose, and that it might have been better for me,
if I had shown myself less insolent. It was clear that I was a vagabond
and a suspicious person. The more earnest I showed myself to get off,
the more reason there was he should keep me fast. Perhaps, after all, I
should turn out to be the felon in question. But, if I was not that, he
had no doubt I was worse; a poacher, or, for what he knew, a murderer.
He had a kind of a notion that he had seen my face before about some
such affair; out of all doubt I was an old offender. He had it in his
choice to send me to hard labour as a vagrant, upon the strength of my
appearance and the contradictions in my story, or to order me to
Warwick; and, out of the spontaneous goodness of his disposition, he
chose the milder side of the alternative. He could assure me I should
not slip through his fingers. It was of more benefit to his majesty's
government to hang one such fellow as he suspected me to be, than, out
of mistaken tenderness, to concern one's self for the good of all the
beggars in the nation.

Finding it was impossible to work, in the way I desired, on a man so
fully impressed with his own dignity and importance and my utter
insignificance, I claimed that, at least, the money taken from my person
should be restored to me. This was granted. His worship perhaps
suspected that he had stretched a point in what he had already done,
and was therefore the less unwilling to relax in this incidental
circumstance. My conductors did not oppose themselves to this
indulgence, for a reason that will appear in the sequel. The justice
however enlarged upon his clemency in this proceeding. He did not know
whether he was not exceeding the spirit of his commission in complying
with my demand. So much money in my possession could not be honestly
come by. But it was his temper to soften, as far as could be done with
propriety, the strict letter of the law.

There were cogent reasons why the gentlemen who had originally taken me
into custody, chose that I should continue in their custody when my
examination was over. Every man is, in his different mode, susceptible
to a sense of honour; and they did not choose to encounter the disgrace
that would accrue to them, if justice had been done. Every man is in
some degree influenced by the love of power; and they were willing I
should owe any benefit I received, to their sovereign grace and
benignity, and not to the mere reason of the case. It was not however an
unsubstantial honour and barren power that formed the objects of their
pursuit: no, their views were deeper than that. In a word, though they
chose that I should retire from the seat of justice, as I had come
before it, a prisoner, yet the tenor of my examination had obliged them,
in spite of themselves, to suspect that I was innocent of the charge
alleged against me. Apprehensive therefore that the hundred guineas
which had been offered as a reward for taking the robber was completely
out of the question in the present business, they were contented to
strike at smaller game. Having conducted me to an inn, and given
directions respecting a vehicle for the journey, they took me aside,
while one of them addressed me in the following manner:--

"You see, my lad, how the case stands: hey for Warwick is the word I and
when we are got there, what may happen then I will not pretend for to
say. Whether you are innocent or no is no business of mine; but you are
not such a chicken as to suppose, if so be as you are innocent, that
that will make your game altogether sure. You say your business calls
you another way, and as how you are in haste: I scorns to cross any man
in his concerns, if I can help it. If therefore you will give us them
there fifteen shiners, why snug is the word. They are of no use to you;
a beggar, you know, is always at home. For the matter of that, we could
have had them in the way of business, as you saw, at the justice's. But
I am a man of principle; I loves to do things above board, and scorns to
extort a shilling from any man."

He who is tinctured with principles of moral discrimination is apt upon
occasion to be run away with by his feelings in that respect, and to
forget the immediate interest of the moment. I confess, that the first
sentiment excited in my mind by this overture was that of indignation. I
was irresistibly impelled to give utterance to this feeling, and
postpone for a moment the consideration of the future. I replied with
the severity which so base a proceeding appeared to deserve. My
bear-leaders were considerably surprised with my firmness, but seemed to
think it beneath them to contest with me the principles I delivered. He
who had made the overture contented himself with replying, "Well, well,
my lad, do as you will; you are not the first man that has been hanged
rather than part with a few guineas." His words did not pass unheeded by
me. They were strikingly applicable to my situation, and I was
determined not to suffer the occasion to escape me unimproved.

The pride of these gentlemen however was too great to admit of further
parley for the present. They left me abruptly; having first ordered an
old man, the father of the landlady, to stay in the room with me while
they were absent. The old man they ordered, for security, to lock the
door, and put the key in his pocket; at the same time mentioning below
stairs the station in which they had left me, that the people of the
house might have an eye upon what went forward, and not suffer me to
escape. What was the intention of this manoeuvre I am unable certainly
to pronounce. Probably it was a sort of compromise between their pride
and their avarice; being desirous, for some reason or other, to drop me
as soon as convenient, and therefore determining to wait the result of
my private meditations on the proposal they had made.




CHAPTER VII.


They were no sooner withdrawn than I cast my eye upon the old man, and
found something extremely venerable and interesting in his appearance.
His form was above the middle size. It indicated that his strength had
been once considerable; nor was it at this time by any means
annihilated. His hair was in considerable quantity, and was as white as
the drifted snow. His complexion was healthful and ruddy, at the same
time that his face was furrowed with wrinkles. In his eye there was
remarkable vivacity, and his whole countenance was strongly expressive
of good-nature. The boorishness of his rank in society was lost in the
cultivation his mind had derived from habits of sensibility and
benevolence.

The view of his figure immediately introduced a train of ideas into my
mind, respecting the advantage to be drawn from the presence of such a
person. The attempt to take any step without his consent was hopeless;
for, though I should succeed with regard to him, he could easily give
the alarm to other persons, who would, no doubt, be within call. Add to
which, I could scarcely have prevailed on myself to offer any offence to
a person whose first appearance so strongly engaged my affection and
esteem. In reality my thoughts were turned into a different channel. I
was impressed with an ardent wish to be able to call this man my
benefactor. Pursued by a train of ill fortune, I could no longer
consider myself as a member of society. I was a solitary being, cut off
from the expectation of sympathy, kindness, and the good-will of
mankind. I was strongly impelled, by the situation in which the present
moment placed me, to indulge in a luxury which my destiny seemed to have
denied. I could not conceive the smallest comparison between the idea of
deriving my liberty from the spontaneous kindness of a worthy and
excellent mind, and that of being indebted for it to the selfishness and
baseness of the worst members of society. It was thus that I allowed
myself in the wantonness of refinement, even in the midst of
destruction.

Guided by these sentiments, I requested his attention to the
circumstances by which I had been brought into my present situation. He
immediately signified his assent, and said he would cheerfully listen to
any thing I thought proper to communicate. I told him, the persons who
had just left me in charge with him had come to this town for the
purpose of apprehending some person who had been guilty of robbing the
mail; that they had chosen to take me up under this warrant, and had
conducted me before a justice of the peace; that they had soon detected
their mistake, the person in question being an Irishman, and differing
from me both in country and stature; but that, by collusion between them
and the justice, they were permitted to retain me in custody, and
pretended to undertake to conduct me to Warwick to confront me with my
accomplice; that, in searching me at the justice's, they had found a sum
of money in my possession which excited their cupidity, and that they
had just been proposing to me to give me my liberty upon condition of my
surrendering this sum into their hands. Under these circumstances, I
requested him to consider, whether he would wish to render himself the
instrument of their extortion. I put myself into his hands, and solemnly
averred the truth of the facts I had just stated. If he would assist me
in my escape, it could have no other effect than to disappoint the base
passions of my conductors. I would upon no account expose him to any
real inconvenience; but I was well assured that the same generosity that
should prompt him to a good deed, would enable him effectually to
vindicate it when done; and that those who detained me, when they had
lost sight of their prey, would feel covered with confusion, and not
dare to take another step in the affair.

The old man listened to what I related with curiosity and interest. He
said that he had always felt an abhorrence to the sort of people who had
me in their hands; that he had an aversion to the task they had just
imposed upon him, but that he could not refuse some little disagreeable
offices to oblige his daughter and son-in-law. He had no doubt, from my
countenance and manner, of the truth of what I had asserted to him. It
was an extraordinary request I had made, and he did not know what had
induced me to think him the sort of person to whom, with any prospect of
success, it might be made. In reality however his habits of thinking
were uncommon, and he felt more than half inclined to act as I desired.
One thing at least he would ask of me in return, which was to be
faithfully informed in some degree respecting the person he was desired
to oblige. What was my name?

The question came upon me unprepared. But, whatever might be the
consequence, I could not bear to deceive the person by whom it was put,
and in the circumstances under which it was put. The practice of
perpetual falsehood is too painful a task. I replied, that my name was
Williams.

He paused. His eye was fixed upon me. I saw his complexion alter at the
repetition of that word. He proceeded with visible anxiety.

My Christian name?

Caleb.

Good God! it could not be ----? He conjured me by every thing that was
sacred to answer him faithfully to one question more. I was not--no, it
was impossible--the person who had formerly lived servant with Mr.
Falkland, of ----?

I told him that, whatever might be the meaning of his question, I would
answer him truly. I was the individual he mentioned.

As I uttered these words the old man rose from his seat. He was sorry
that fortune had been so unpropitious to him, as for him ever to have
set eyes upon me! I was a monster with whom the very earth groaned!

I entreated that he would suffer me to explain this new
misapprehension, as he had done in the former instance. I had no doubt
that I should do it equally to his satisfaction.

No! no! no! he would upon no consideration admit, that his ears should
suffer such contamination. This case and the other were very different.
There was no criminal upon the face of the earth, no murderer, half so
detestable as the person who could prevail upon himself to utter the
charges I had done, by way of recrimination, against so generous a
master.--The old man was in a perfect agony with the recollection.

At length he calmed himself enough to say, he should never cease to
grieve that he had held a moment's parley with me. He did not know what
was the conduct severe justice required of him; but, since he had come
into the knowledge of who I was only by my own confession, it was
irreconcilably repugnant to his feelings to make use of that knowledge
to my injury. Here therefore all relation between us ceased; as indeed
it would be an abuse of words to consider me in the light of a human
creature. He would do me no mischief; but, on the other hand, he would
not, for the world, be in any way assisting and abetting me.

I was inexpressibly affected at the abhorrence this good and benevolent
creature expressed against me. I could not be silent; I endeavoured once
and again to prevail upon him to hear me. But his determination was
unalterable. Our contest lasted for some time, and he at length
terminated it by ringing the bell, and calling up the waiter. A very
little while after, my conductors entered, and the other persons
withdrew.

It was a part of the singularity of my fate that it hurried me from one
species of anxiety and distress to another, too rapidly to suffer any
one of them to sink deeply into my mind. I am apt to believe, in the
retrospect, that half the calamities I was destined to endure would
infallibly have overwhelmed and destroyed me. But, as it was, I had no
leisure to chew the cud upon misfortunes as they befel me, but was under
the necessity of forgetting them, to guard against peril that the next
moment seemed ready to crush me.

The behaviour of this incomparable and amiable old man cut me to the
heart. It was a dreadful prognostic for all my future life. But, as I
have just observed, my conductors entered, and another subject called
imperiously upon my attention. I could have been content, mortified as I
was at this instant, to have been shut up in some impenetrable solitude,
and to have wrapped myself in inconsolable misery. But the grief I
endured had not such power over me as that I could be content to risk
the being led to the gallows. The love of life, and still more a hatred
against oppression, steeled my heart against that species of inertness.
In the scene that had just passed I had indulged, as I have said, in a
wantonness and luxury of refinement. It was time that indulgence should
be brought to a period. It was dangerous to trifle any more upon the
brink of fate; and, penetrated as I was with sadness by the result of my
last attempt, I was little disposed to unnecessary circumambulation.

I was exactly in the temper in which the gentlemen who had me in their
power would have desired to find me. Accordingly we entered immediately
upon business; and, after some chaffering, they agreed to accept eleven
guineas as the price of my freedom. To preserve however the chariness of
their reputation, they insisted upon conducting me with them for a few
miles on the outside of a stage-coach. They then pretended that the road
they had to travel lay in a cross country direction; and, having
quitted the vehicle, they suffered me, almost as soon as it was out of
sight, to shake off this troublesome association, and follow my own
inclinations. It may be worth remarking by the way, that these fellows
outwitted themselves at their own trade. They had laid hold of me at
first under the idea of a prize of a hundred guineas; they had since
been glad to accept a composition of eleven: but if they had retained me
a little longer in their possession, they would have found the
possibility of acquiring the sum that had originally excited their
pursuit, upon a different score.

The mischances that had befallen me, in my late attempt to escape from
my pursuers by sea, deterred me from the thought of repeating that
experiment. I therefore once more returned to the suggestion of hiding
myself, at least for the present, amongst the crowds of the metropolis.
Meanwhile, I by no means thought proper to venture by the direct route,
and the less so, as that was the course which would be steered by my
late conductors; but took my road along the borders of Wales. The only
incident worth relating in this place occurred in an attempt to cross
the Severn in a particular point. The mode was by a ferry; but, by some
strange inadvertence, I lost my way so completely as to be wholly unable
that night to reach the ferry, and arrive at the town which I had
destined for my repose.

This may seem a petty disappointment, in the midst of the overwhelming
considerations that might have been expected to engross every thought of
my mind. Yet it was borne by me with singular impatience. I was that day
uncommonly fatigued. Previously to the time that I mistook, or at least
was aware of the mistake of the road, the sky had become black and
lowring, and soon after the clouds burst down in sheets of rain. I was
in the midst of a heath, without a tree or covering of any sort to
shelter me. I was thoroughly drenched in a moment. I pushed on with a
sort of sullen determination. By and by the rain gave place to a storm
of hail. The hail-stones were large and frequent. I was ill defended by
the miserable covering I wore, and they seemed to cut me in a thousand
directions. The hail-storm subsided, and was again succeeded by a heavy
rain. By this time it was that I had perceived I was wholly out of my
road. I could discover neither man nor beast, nor habitation of any
kind. I walked on, measuring at every turn the path it would be proper
to pursue, but in no instance finding a sufficient reason to reject one
or prefer another. My mind was bursting with depression and anguish. I
muttered imprecations and murmuring as I passed along. I was full of
loathing and abhorrence of life, and all that life carries in its train.
After wandering without any certain direction for two hours, I was
overtaken by the night. The scene was nearly pathless, and it was vain
to think of proceeding any farther.

Here I was, without comfort, without shelter, and without food. There
was not a particle of my covering that was not as wet as if it had been
fished from the bottom of the ocean. My teeth chattered. I trembled in
every limb. My heart burned with universal fury. At one moment I
stumbled and fell over some unseen obstacle; at another I was turned
back by an impediment I could not overcome.

There was no strict connection between these casual inconveniences and
the persecution under which I laboured. But my distempered thoughts
confounded them together. I cursed the whole system of human existence.
I said, "Here I am, an outcast, destined to perish with hunger and cold.
All men desert me. All men hate me. I am driven with mortal threats
from the sources of comfort and existence. Accursed world! that hates
without a cause, that overwhelms innocence with calamities which ought
to be spared even to guilt! Accursed world! dead to every manly
sympathy; with eyes of horn, and hearts of steel! Why do I consent to
live any longer? Why do I seek to drag on an existence, which, if
protracted, must be protracted amidst the lairs of these human tigers?"

This paroxysm at length exhausted itself. Presently after, I discovered
a solitary shed, which I was contented to resort to for shelter. In a
corner of the shed I found some clean straw. I threw off my rags, placed
them in a situation where they would best be dried, and buried myself
amidst this friendly warmth. Here I forgot by degrees the anguish that
had racked me. A wholesome shed and fresh straw may seem but scanty
benefits; but they offered themselves when least expected, and my whole
heart was lightened by the encounter. Through fatigue of mind and body,
it happened in this instance, though in general my repose was remarkably
short, that I slept till almost noon of the next day. When I rose, I
found that I was at no great distance from the ferry, which I crossed,
and entered the town where I intended to have rested the preceding
night.

It was market-day. As I passed near the cross, I observed two people
look at me with great earnestness: after which one of them exclaimed, "I
will be damned if I do not think that this is the very fellow those men
were enquiring for who set off an hour ago by the coach for ----." I was
extremely alarmed at this information; and, quickening my pace, turned
sharp down a narrow lane. The moment I was out of sight I ran with all
the speed I could exert, and did not think myself safe till I was
several miles distant from the place where this information had reached
my ears. I have always believed that the men to whom it related were the
very persons who had apprehended me on board the ship in which I had
embarked for Ireland; that, by some accident, they had met with the
description of my person as published on the part of Mr. Falkland; and
that, from putting together the circumstances, they had been led to
believe that this was the very individual who had lately been in their
custody. Indeed it was a piece of infatuation in me, for which I am now
unable to account, that, after the various indications which had
occurred in that affair, proving to them that I was a man in critical
and peculiar circumstances, I should have persisted in wearing the same
disguise without the smallest alteration. My escape in the present case
was eminently fortunate. If I had not lost my way in consequence of the
hail-storm on the preceding night, or if I had not so greatly overslept
myself this very morning, I must almost infallibly have fallen into the
hands of these infernal blood-hunters.

The town they had chosen for their next stage, the name of which I had
thus caught in the market-place, was the town to which, but for this
intimation, I should have immediately proceeded. As it was, I determined
to take a road as wide of it as possible. In the first place to which I
came, in which it was practicable to do so, I bought a great coat, which
I drew over my beggar's weeds, and a better hat. The hat I slouched over
my face, and covered one of my eyes with a green-silk shade. The
handkerchief, which I had hitherto worn about my head, I now tied about
the lower part of my visage, so as to cover my mouth. By degrees I
discarded every part of my former dress, and wore for my upper garment
a kind of carman's frock, which, being of the better sort, made me look
like the son of a reputable farmer of the lower class. Thus equipped, I
proceeded on my journey, and, after a thousand alarms, precautions, and
circuitous deviations from the direct path, arrived safely in London.




CHAPTER VIII.


Here then was the termination of an immense series of labours, upon
which no man could have looked back without astonishment, or forward
without a sentiment bordering on despair. It was at a price which defies
estimation that I had purchased this resting-place; whether we consider
the efforts it had cost me to escape from the walls of my prison, or the
dangers and anxieties to which I had been a prey, from that hour to the
present.

But why do I call the point at which I was now arrived at a
resting-place? Alas, it was diametrically the reverse! It was my first
and immediate business to review all the projects of disguise I had
hitherto conceived, to derive every improvement I could invent from the
practice to which I had been subjected, and to manufacture a veil of
concealment more impenetrable than ever. This was an effort to which I
could see no end. In ordinary cases the hue and cry after a supposed
offender is a matter of temporary operation; but ordinary cases formed
no standard for the colossal intelligence of Mr. Falkland. For the same
reason, London, which appears an inexhaustible reservoir of concealment
to the majority of mankind, brought no such consolatory sentiment to my
mind. Whether life were worth accepting on such terms I cannot
pronounce. I only know that I persisted in this exertion of my
faculties, through a sort of parental love that men are accustomed to
entertain for their intellectual offspring; the more thought I had
expended in rearing it to its present perfection, the less did I find
myself disposed to abandon it. Another motive, not less strenuously
exciting me to perseverance, was the ever-growing repugnance I felt to
injustice and arbitrary power.

The first evening of my arrival in town I slept at an obscure inn in the
borough of Southwark, choosing that side of the metropolis, on account
of its lying entirely wide of the part of England from which I came. I
entered the inn in the evening in my countryman's frock; and, having
paid for my lodging before I went to bed, equipped myself next morning
as differently as my wardrobe would allow, and left the house before
day. The frock I made up into a small packet, and, having carried it to
a distance as great as I thought necessary, I dropped it in the corner
of an alley through which I passed. My next care was to furnish myself
with another suit of apparel, totally different from any to which I had
hitherto had recourse. The exterior which I was now induced to assume
was that of a Jew. One of the gang of thieves upon ---- forest, had been
of that race; and by the talent of mimicry, which I have already stated
myself to possess, I could copy their pronunciation of the English
language, sufficiently to answer such occasions as were likely to
present themselves. One of the preliminaries I adopted, was to repair to
a quarter of the town in which great numbers of this people reside, and
study their complexion and countenance. Having made such provision as my
prudence suggested to me, I retired for that night to an inn in the
midway between Mile-end and Wapping. Here I accoutred myself in my new
habiliments; and, having employed the same precautions as before,
retired from my lodging at a time least exposed to observation. It is
unnecessary to describe the particulars of my new equipage; suffice it
to say, that one of my cares was to discolour my complexion, and give it
the dun and sallow hue which is in most instances characteristic of the
tribe to which I assumed to belong; and that when my metamorphosis was
finished, I could not, upon the strictest examination, conceive that any
one could have traced out the person of Caleb Williams in this new
disguise.

Thus far advanced in the execution of my project. I deemed it advisable
to procure a lodging, and change my late wandering life for a stationary
one. In this lodging I constantly secluded myself from the rising to the
setting of the sun; the periods I allowed for exercise and air were few,
and those few by night. I was even cautious of so much as approaching
the window of my apartment, though upon the attic story; a principle I
laid down to myself was, not wantonly and unnecessarily to expose myself
to risk, however slight that risk might appear.

Here let me pause for a moment, to bring before the reader, in the way
in which it was impressed upon my mind, the nature of my situation. I
was born free: I was born healthy, vigorous, and active, complete in all
the lineaments and members of a human body. I was not born indeed to the
possession of hereditary wealth; but I had a better inheritance, an
enterprising mind, an inquisitive spirit, a liberal ambition. In a word,
I accepted my lot with willingness and content; I did not fear but I
should make my cause good in the lists of existence. I was satisfied to
aim at small things; I was pleased to play at first for a slender stake;
I was more willing to grow than to descend in my individual
significance.

The free spirit and the firm heart with which I commenced, one
circumstance was sufficient to blast. I was ignorant of the power which
the institutions of society give to one man over others; I had fallen
unwarily into the hands of a person who held it as his fondest wish to
oppress and destroy me.

I found myself subjected, undeservedly on my part, to all the
disadvantages which mankind, if they reflected upon them, would hesitate
to impose on acknowledged guilt. In every human countenance I feared to
find the countenance of an enemy. I shrunk from the vigilance of every
human eye. I dared not open my heart to the best affections of our
nature. I was shut up, a deserted, solitary wretch, in the midst of my
species. I dared not look for the consolations of friendship; but,
instead of seeking to identify myself with the joys and sorrows of
others, and exchanging the delicious gifts of confidence and sympathy,
was compelled to centre my thoughts and my vigilance in myself. My life
was all a lie. I had a counterfeit character to support. I had
counterfeit manners to assume. My gait, my gestures, my accents, were
all of them to be studied. I was not free to indulge, no not one, honest
sally of the soul. Attended with these disadvantages, I was to procure
myself a subsistence, a subsistence to be acquired with infinite
precautions, and to be consumed without the hope of enjoyment.

This, even this, I was determined to endure; to put my shoulder to the
burthen, and support it with unshrinking firmness. Let it not however be
supposed that I endured it without repining and abhorrence. My time was
divided between the terrors of an animal that skulks from its pursuers,
the obstinacy of unshrinking firmness, and that elastic revulsion that
from time to time seems to shrivel the very hearts of the miserable. If
at some moments I fiercely defied all the rigours of my fate, at others,
and those of frequent recurrence, I sunk into helpless despondence. I
looked forward without hope through the series of my existence, tears of
anguish rushed from my eyes, my courage became extinct, and I cursed the
conscious life that was reproduced with every returning day.

"Why," upon such occasions I was accustomed to exclaim, "why am I
overwhelmed with the load of existence? Why are all these engines at
work to torment me? I am no murderer; yet, if I were, what worse could I
be fated to suffer? How vile, squalid, and disgraceful is the state to
which I am condemned! This is not my place in the roll of existence, the
place for which either my temper or my understanding has prepared me! To
what purpose serve the restless aspirations of my soul, but to make me,
like a frighted bird, beat myself in vain against the enclosure of my
cage? Nature, barbarous nature! to me thou hast proved indeed the worst
of step-mothers; endowed me with wishes insatiate, and sunk me in
never-ending degradation!"

I might have thought myself more secure if I had been in possession of
money upon which to subsist. The necessity of earning for myself the
means of existence, evidently tended to thwart the plan of secrecy to
which I was condemned. Whatever labour I adopted, or deemed myself
qualified to discharge, it was first to be considered how I was to be
provided with employment, and where I was to find an employer or
purchaser for my commodities. In the mean time I had no alternative.
The little money with which I had escaped from the blood-hunters was
almost expended.

After the minutest consideration I was able to bestow upon this
question. I determined that literature should be the field of my first
experiment. I had read of money being acquired in this way, and of
prices given by the speculators in this sort of ware to its proper
manufacturers. My qualifications I esteemed at a slender valuation. I
was not without a conviction that experience and practice must pave the
way to excellent production. But, though of these I was utterly
destitute, my propensities had always led me in this direction; and my
early thirst of knowledge had conducted me to a more intimate
acquaintance with books, than could perhaps have been expected under my
circumstances. If my literary pretensions were slight, the demand I
intended to make upon them was not great. All I asked was a subsistence;
and I was persuaded few persons could subsist upon slenderer means than
myself. I also considered this as a temporary expedient, and hoped that
accident or time might hereafter place me in a less precarious
situation. The reasons that principally determined my choice were, that
this employment called upon me for the least preparation, and could, as
I thought, be exercised with least observation.

There was a solitary woman, of middle age, who tenanted a chamber in
this house, upon the same floor with my own. I had no sooner determined
upon the destination of my industry than I cast my eye upon her as the
possible instrument for disposing of my productions. Excluded as I was
from all intercourse with my species in general, I found pleasure in the
occasional exchange of a few words with this inoffensive and
good-humoured creature, who was already of an age to preclude scandal.
She lived upon a very small annuity, allowed her by a distant relation,
a woman of quality, who, possessed of thousands herself, had no other
anxiety with respect to this person than that she should not contaminate
her alliance by the exertion of honest industry. This humble creature
was of a uniformly cheerful and active disposition, unacquainted alike
with the cares of wealth and the pressure of misfortune. Though her
pretensions were small, and her information slender, she was by no means
deficient in penetration. She remarked the faults and follies of mankind
with no contemptible discernment; but her temper was of so mild and
forgiving a cast, as would have induced most persons to believe that she
perceived nothing of the matter. Her heart overflowed with the milk of
kindness. She was sincere and ardent in her attachments, and never did
she omit a service which she perceived herself able to render to a human
being.

Had it not been for these qualifications of temper, I should probably
have found that my appearance, that of a deserted, solitary lad, of
Jewish extraction, effectually precluded my demands upon her kindness.
But I speedily perceived, from her manner of receiving and returning
civilities of an indifferent sort, that her heart was too noble to have
its effusions checked by any base and unworthy considerations.
Encouraged by these preliminaries, I determined to select her as my
agent. I found her willing and alert in the business I proposed to her.
That I might anticipate occasions of suspicion, I frankly told her that,
for reasons which I wished to be excused from relating, but which, if
related, I was sure would not deprive me of her good opinion, I found it
necessary, for the present, to keep myself private. With this statement
she readily acquiesced, and told me that she had no desire for any
further information than I found it expedient to give.

My first productions were of the poetical kind. After having finished
two or three, I directed this generous creature to take them to the
office of a newspaper; but they were rejected with contempt by the
Aristarchus of that place, who, having bestowed on them a superficial
glance, told her that such matters were not in his way. I cannot help
mentioning in this place, that the countenance of Mrs. Marney (this was
the name of my ambassadress) was in all cases a perfect indication of
her success, and rendered explanation by words wholly unnecessary. She
interested herself so unreservedly in what she undertook, that she felt
either miscarriage or good fortune much more exquisitely than I did. I
had an unhesitating confidence in my own resources, and, occupied as I
was in meditations more interesting and more painful, I regarded these
matters as altogether trivial.

I quietly took the pieces back, and laid them upon my table. Upon
revisal, I altered and transcribed one of them, and, joining it with two
others, despatched them together to the editor of a magazine. He desired
they might be left with him till the day after to-morrow. When that day
came he told my friend they should be inserted; but, Mrs. Marney asking
respecting the price, he replied, it was their constant rule to give
nothing for poetical compositions, the letter-box being always full of
writings of that sort; but if the gentleman would try his hand in prose,
a short essay or a tale, he would see what he could do for him.

With the requisition of my literary dictator I immediately complied. I
attempted a paper in the style of Addison's Spectators, which was
accepted. In a short time I was upon an established footing in this
quarter. I however distrusted my resources in the way of moral
disquisition, and soon turned my thoughts to his other suggestion, a
tale. His demands upon me were now frequent, and, to facilitate my
labours, I bethought myself of the resource of translation. I had
scarcely any convenience with respect to the procuring of books; but, as
my memory was retentive, I frequently translated or modelled my
narrative upon a reading of some years before. By a fatality, for which
I did not exactly know how to account, my thoughts frequently led me to
the histories of celebrated robbers; and I related, from time to time,
incidents and anecdotes of Cartouche, Gusman d'Alfarache, and other
memorable worthies, whose career was terminated upon the gallows or the
scaffold.

In the mean time a retrospect to my own situation rendered a
perseverance even in this industry difficult to be maintained. I often
threw down my pen in an ecstasy of despair. Sometimes for whole days
together I was incapable of action, and sunk into a sort of partial
stupor, too wretched to be described. Youth and health however enabled
me, from time to time, to get the better of my dejection, and to rouse
myself to something like a gaiety, which, if it had been permanent,
might have made this interval of my story tolerable to my reflections.




CHAPTER IX.


While I was thus endeavouring to occupy and provide for the intermediate
period, till the violence of the pursuit after me might be abated, a
new source of danger opened upon me of which I had no previous
suspicion.

Gines, the thief who had been expelled from Captain Raymond's gang, had
fluctuated, during the last years of his life, between the two
professions of a violator of the laws and a retainer to their
administration. He had originally devoted himself to the first; and
probably his initiation in the mysteries of thieving qualified him to be
peculiarly expert in the profession of a thief-taker--a profession he
had adopted, not from choice, but necessity. In this employment his
reputation was great, though perhaps not equal to his merits; for it
happens here as in other departments of human society, that, however the
subalterns may furnish wisdom and skill, the principals exclusively
possess the _éclat_. He was exercising this art in a very prosperous
manner, when it happened, by some accident, that one or two of his
achievements previous to his having shaken off the dregs of unlicensed
depredation were in danger of becoming subjects of public attention.
Having had repeated intimations of this, he thought it prudent to
decamp; and it was during this period of his retreat that he entered
into the ---- gang.

Such was the history of this man antecedently to his being placed in the
situation in which I had first encountered him. At the time of that
encounter he was a veteran of Captain Raymond's gang; for thieves being
a short-lived race, the character of veteran costs the less time in
acquiring. Upon his expulsion from this community he returned once more
to his lawful profession, and by his old comrades was received with
congratulation as a lost sheep. In the vulgar classes of society no
length of time is sufficient to expiate a crime; but among the
honourable fraternity of thief-takers it is a rule never to bring one of
their own brethren to a reckoning when it can with any decency be
avoided. They are probably reluctant to fix an unnecessary stain upon
the ermine of their profession. Another rule observed by those who have
passed through the same gradation as Gines had done, and which was
adopted by Gines himself, is always to reserve such as have been the
accomplices of their depredations to the last, and on no account to
assail them without great necessity or powerful temptation. For this
reason, according to Gines's system of tactics, Captain Raymond and his
confederates were, as he would have termed it, safe from his
retaliation.

But, though Gines was, in this sense of the term, a man of strict
honour, my case unfortunately did not fall within the laws of honour he
acknowledged. Misfortune had overtaken me, and I was on all sides
without protection or shelter. The persecution to which I was exposed
was founded upon the supposition of my having committed felony to an
immense amount. But in this Gines had had no participation; he was
careless whether the supposition were true or false, and hated me as
much as if my innocence had been established beyond the reach of
suspicion.

The blood-hunters who had taken me into custody at ----, related, as
usual among their fraternity, a part of their adventure, and told of the
reason which inclined them to suppose, that the individual who had
passed through their custody, was the very Caleb Williams for whose
apprehension a reward had been offered of a hundred guineas. Gines,
whose acuteness was eminent in the way of his profession, by comparing
facts and dates, was induced to suspect in his own mind, that Caleb
Williams was the person he had hustled and wounded upon ---- forest.
Against that person he entertained the bitterest aversion. I had been
the innocent occasion of his being expelled with disgrace from Captain
Raymond's gang; and Gines, as I afterwards understood, was intimately
persuaded that there was no comparison between the liberal and manly
profession of a robber from which I had driven him, and the sordid and
mechanical occupation of a blood-hunter, to which he was obliged to
return. He no sooner received the information I have mentioned than he
vowed revenge. He determined to leave all other objects, and consecrate
every faculty of his mind to the unkennelling me from my hiding-place.
The offered reward, which his vanity made him consider as assuredly his
own, appeared as the complete indemnification of his labour and expense.
Thus I had to encounter the sagacity he possessed in the way of his
profession, whetted and stimulated by a sentiment of vengeance, in a
mind that knew no restraint from conscience or humanity.

When I drew to myself a picture of my situation soon after having fixed
on my present abode, I foolishly thought, as the unhappy are accustomed
to do, that my calamity would admit of no aggravation. The aggravation
which, unknown to me, at this time occurred was the most fearful that
any imagination could have devised. Nothing could have happened more
critically hostile to my future peace, than my fatal encounter with
Gines upon ---- forest. By this means, as it now appears, I had fastened
upon myself a second enemy, of that singular and dreadful sort that is
determined never to dismiss its animosity as long as life shall endure.
While Falkland was the hungry lion whose roarings astonished and
appalled me, Gines was a noxious insect, scarcely less formidable and
tremendous, that hovered about my goings, and perpetually menaced me
with the poison of his sting.

The first step pursued by him in execution of his project, was to set
out for the sea-port town where I had formerly been apprehended. From
thence he traced me to the banks of the Severn, and from the banks of
the Severn to London. It is scarcely necessary to observe that this is
always practicable, provided the pursuer have motives strong enough to
excite him to perseverance, unless the precautions of the fugitive be,
in the highest degree, both judicious in the conception, and fortunate
in the execution. Gines indeed, in the course of his pursuit, was often
obliged to double his steps; and, like the harrier, whenever he was at a
fault, return to the place where he had last perceived the scent of the
animal whose death he had decreed. He spared neither pains nor time in
the gratification of the passion, which choice had made his ruling one.

Upon my arrival in town he for a moment lost all trace of me, London
being a place in which, on account of the magnitude of its dimensions,
it might well be supposed that an individual could remain hidden and
unknown. But no difficulty could discourage this new adversary. He went
from inn to inn (reasonably supposing that there was no private house to
which I could immediately repair), till he found, by the description he
gave, and the recollections he excited, that I had slept for one night
in the borough of Southwark. But he could get no further information.
The people of the inn had no knowledge what had become of me the next
morning.

This however did but render him more eager in the pursuit. The
describing me was now more difficult, on account of the partial change
of dress I had made the second day of my being in town. But Gines at
length overcame the obstacle from that quarter.

Having traced me to my second inn, he was here furnished with a more
copious information. I had been a subject of speculation for the leisure
hours of some of the persons belonging to this inn. An old woman, of a
most curious and loquacious disposition, who lived opposite to it, and
who that morning rose early to her washing, had espied me from her
window, by the light of a large lamp which hung over the inn, as I
issued from the gate. She had but a very imperfect view of me, but she
thought there was something Jewish in my appearance. She was accustomed
to hold a conference every morning with the landlady of the inn, some of
the waiters and chambermaids occasionally assisting at it. In the course
of the dialogue of this morning, she asked some questions about the Jew
who had slept there the night before. No Jew had slept there. The
curiosity of the landlady was excited in her turn. By the time of the
morning it could be no other but me. It was very strange! They compared
notes respecting my appearance and dress. No two things could be more
dissimilar. The Jew Christian, upon any dearth of subjects of
intelligence, repeatedly furnished matter for their discourse.

The information thus afforded to Gines appeared exceedingly material.
But the performance did not for some time keep pace with the promise. He
could not enter every private house into which lodgers were ever
admitted, in the same manner that he had treated the inns. He walked the
streets, and examined with a curious and inquisitive eye the countenance
of every Jew about my stature; but in vain. He repaired to Duke's Place
and the synagogues. It was not here that in reality he could calculate
upon finding me; but he resorted to those means in despair, and as a
last hope. He was more than once upon the point of giving up the
pursuit; but he was recalled to it by an insatiable and restless
appetite for revenge.

It was during this perturbed and fluctuating state of his mind, that he
chanced to pay a visit to a brother of his, who was the head-workman of
a printing-office. There was little intercourse between these two
persons, their dispositions and habits of life being extremely
dissimilar. The printer was industrious, sober, inclined to methodism,
and of a propensity to accumulation. He was extremely dissatisfied with
the character and pursuits of his brother, and had made some ineffectual
attempts to reclaim him. But, though they by no means agreed in their
habits of thinking, they sometimes saw each other. Gines loved to boast
of as many of his achievements as he dared venture to mention; and his
brother was one more hearer, in addition to the set of his usual
associates. The printer was amused with the blunt sagacity of remark and
novelty of incident that characterised Gines's conversation. He was
secretly pleased, in spite of all his sober and church-going prejudices,
that he was brother to a man of so much ingenuity and fortitude.

After having listened for some time upon this occasion to the wonderful
stories which Gines, in his rugged way, condescended to tell, the
printer felt an ambition to entertain his brother in his turn. He began
to retail some of my stories of Cartouche and Gusman d'Alfarache. The
attention of Gines was excited. His first emotion was wonder; his second
was envy and aversion. Where did the printer get these stories? This
question was answered. "I will tell you what," said the printer, "we
none of us know what to make of the writer of these articles. He writes
poetry, and morality, and history: I am a printer, and corrector of the
press, and may pretend without vanity to be a tolerably good judge of
these matters: he writes them all to my mind extremely fine; and yet he
is no more than a Jew." [To my honest printer this seemed as strange, as
if they had been written by a Cherokee chieftain at the falls of the
Mississippi.]

"A Jew! How do you know? Did you ever see him?"

"No; the matter is always brought to us by a woman. But my master hates
mysteries; he likes to see his authors himself. So he plagues and
plagues the old woman; but he can never get any thing out of her, except
that one day she happened to drop that the young gentleman was a Jew."

A Jew! a young gentleman! a person who did every thing by proxy, and
made a secret of all his motions! Here was abundant matter for the
speculations and suspicions of Gines. He was confirmed in them, without
adverting to the process of his own mind, by the subject of my
lucubrations,--men who died by the hand of the executioner. He said
little more to his brother, except asking, as if casually, what sort of
an old woman this was? of what age she might be? and whether she often
brought him materials of this kind? and soon after took occasion to
leave him. It was with vast pleasure that Gines had listened to this
unhoped-for information. Having collected from his brother sufficient
hints relative to the person and appearance of Mrs. Marney, and
understanding that he expected to receive something from me the next
day, Gines took his stand in the street early, that he might not risk
miscarriage by negligence. He waited several hours, but not without
success. Mrs. Marney came; he watched her into the house; and after
about twenty minutes delay, saw her return. He dogged her from street
to street; observed her finally enter the door of a private house; and
congratulated himself upon having at length arrived at the consummation
of his labours.

The house she entered was not her own habitation. By a sort of
miraculous accident she had observed Gines following her in the street.
As she went home she saw a woman who had fallen down in a fainting fit.
Moved by the compassion that was ever alive in her, she approached her,
in order to render her assistance. Presently a crowd collected round
them. Mrs. Marney, having done what she was able, once more proceeded
homewards. Observing the crowd round her, the idea of pickpockets
occurred to her mind; she put her hands to her sides, and at the same
time looked round upon the populace. She had left the circle somewhat
abruptly; and Gines, who had been obliged to come nearer, lest he should
lose her in the confusion, was at that moment standing exactly opposite
to her. His visage was of the most extraordinary kind; habit had written
the characters of malignant cunning and dauntless effrontery in every
line of his face; and Mrs. Marney, who was neither philosopher nor
physiognomist, was nevertheless struck. This good woman, like most
persons of her notable character, had a peculiar way of going home, not
through the open streets, but by narrow lanes and alleys, with intricate
insertions and sudden turnings. In one of these, by some accident, she
once again caught a glance of her pursuer. This circumstance, together
with the singularity of his appearance, awakened her conjectures. Could
he be following her? It was the middle of the day, and she could have no
fears for herself. But could this circumstance have any reference to me?
She recollected the precautions and secrecy I practised, and had no
doubt that I had reasons for what I did. She recollected that she had
always been upon her guard respecting me; but had she been sufficiently
so? She thought that, if she should be the means of any mischief to me,
she should be miserable for ever. She determined therefore, by way of
precaution in case of the worst, to call at a friend's house, and send
me word of what had occurred. Having instructed her friend, she went out
immediately upon a visit to a person in the exactly opposite direction,
and desired her friend to proceed upon the errand to me, five minutes
after she left the house. By this prudence she completely extricated me
from the present danger.

Meantime the intelligence that was brought me by no means ascertained
the greatness of the peril. For any thing I could discover in it the
circumstance might be perfectly innocent, and the fear solely proceed
from the over-caution and kindness of this benevolent and excellent
woman. Yet, such was the misery of my situation, I had no choice. For
this menace or no menace, I was obliged to desert my habitation at a
minute's warning, taking with me nothing but what I could carry in my
hand; to see my generous benefactress no more; to quit my little
arrangements and provision; and to seek once again, in some forlorn
retreat, new projects, and, if of that I could have any rational hope, a
new friend. I descended into the street with a heavy, not an irresolute
heart. It was broad day. I said, persons are at this moment supposed to
be roaming the street in search of me: I must not trust to the chance of
their pursuing one direction, and I another. I traversed half a dozen
streets, and then dropped into an obscure house of entertainment for
persons of small expense. In this house I took some refreshment, passed
several hours of active but melancholy thinking, and at last procured a
bed. As soon however as it was dark I went out (for this was
indispensable) to purchase the materials of a new disguise. Having
adjusted it as well as I could during the night, I left this asylum,
with the same precautions that I had employed in former instances.




CHAPTER X.


I procured a new lodging. By some bias of the mind, it may be,
gratifying itself with images of peril, I inclined to believe that Mrs.
Marney's alarm had not been without foundation. I was however unable to
conjecture through what means danger had approached me; and had
therefore only the unsatisfactory remedy of redoubling my watch upon all
my actions. Still I had the joint considerations pressing upon me of
security and subsistence. I had some small remains of the produce of my
former industry; but this was but small, for my employer was in arrear
with me, and I did not choose in any method to apply to him for payment.
The anxieties of my mind, in spite of all my struggles, preyed upon my
health. I did not consider myself as in safety for an instant. My
appearance was wasted to a shadow; and I started at every sound that was
unexpected. Sometimes I was half tempted to resign myself into the hands
of the law, and brave its worst; but resentment and indignation at those
times speedily flowed back upon my mind, and re-animated my
perseverance.

I knew no better resource with respect to subsistence than that I had
employed in the former instance, of seeking some third person to stand
between me and the disposal of my industry. I might find an individual
ready to undertake this office in my behalf; but where should I find the
benevolent soul of Mrs. Marney? The person I fixed upon was a Mr.
Spurrel, a man who took in work from the watchmakers, and had an
apartment upon our second floor. I examined him two or three times with
irresolute glances, as we passed upon the stairs, before I would venture
to accost him. He observed this, and at length kindly invited me into
his apartment.

Being seated, he condoled with me upon my seeming bad health, and the
solitary mode of my living, and wished to know whether he could be of
any service to me. "From the first moment he saw me, he had conceived an
affection for me." In my present disguise I appeared twisted and
deformed, and in other respects by no means an object of attraction. But
it seemed Mr. Spurrel had lost an only son about six months before, and
I was "the very picture of him." If I had put off my counterfeited
ugliness, I should probably have lost all hold upon his affections. "He
was now an old man," as he observed, "just dropping into the grave, and
his son had been his only consolation. The poor lad was always ailing,
but he had been a nurse to him; and the more tending he required while
he was alive, the more he missed him now he was dead. Now he had not a
friend, nor any body that cared for him, in the whole world. If I
pleased, I should be instead of that son to him, and he would treat me
in all respects with the same attention and kindness."

I expressed my sense of these benevolent offers, but told him that I
should be sorry to be in any way burthensome to him. "My ideas at
present led me to a private and solitary life, and my chief difficulty
was to reconcile this with some mode of earning necessary subsistence.
If he would condescend to lend me his assistance in smoothing this
difficulty, it would be the greatest benefit he could confer on me." I
added, that "my mind had always had a mechanical and industrious turn,
and that I did not doubt of soon mastering any craft to which I
seriously applied myself. I had not been brought up to any trade; but,
if he would favour me with his instructions, I would work with him as
long as he pleased for a bare subsistence. I knew that I was asking of
him an extraordinary kindness; but I was urged on the one hand by the
most extreme necessity, and encouraged on the other by the
persuasiveness of his friendly professions."

The old man dropped some tears over my apparent distress, and readily
consented to every thing I proposed. Our agreement was soon made, and I
entered upon my functions accordingly. My new friend was a man of a
singular turn of mind. Love of money, and a charitable officiousness of
demeanour, were his leading characteristics. He lived in the most
penurious manner, and denied himself every indulgence. I entitled myself
almost immediately, as he frankly acknowledged, to some remuneration for
my labours, and accordingly he insisted upon my being paid. He did not
however, as some persons would have done under the circumstance, pay me
the whole amount of my earnings, but professed to subtract from them
twenty per cent, as an equitable consideration for instruction, and
commission-money in procuring me a channel for my industry. Yet he
frequently shed tears over me, was uneasy in every moment of our
indispensable separation, and exhibited perpetual tokens of attachment
and fondness. I found him a man of excellent mechanical contrivance,
and received considerable pleasure from his communications. My own
sources of information were various; and he frequently expressed his
wonder and delight in the contemplation of my powers, as well of
amusement as exertion.

Thus I appeared to have attained a situation not less eligible than in
my connection with Mrs. Marney. I was however still more unhappy. My
fits of despondence were deeper, and of more frequent recurrence. My
health every day grew worse; and Mr. Spurrel was not without
apprehensions that he should lose me, as he before lost his only son.

I had not been long however in this new situation, before an incident
occurred which filled me with greater alarm and apprehension than ever.
I was walking out one evening, after a long visitation of languor, for
an hour's exercise and air, when my ears were struck with two or three
casual sounds from the mouth of a hawker who was bawling his wares. I
stood still to inform myself more exactly, when, to my utter
astonishment and confusion, I heard him deliver himself nearly in these
words: "_Here you have the_ MOST WONDERFUL AND SURPRISING HISTORY AND
MIRACULOUS ADVENTURES OF CALEB WILLIAMS: _you are informed how he first
robbed, and then brought false accusations against his master; as also
of his attempting divers times to break out of prison, till at last he
effected his escape in the most wonderful and uncredible manner; as also
of his travelling the kingdom in various disguises, and the robberies he
committed with a most desperate and daring gang of thieves; and of his
coming up to London, where it is supposed he now lies concealed; with a
true and faithful copy of the hue and cry printed and published by one
of his Majesty's most principal secretaries of state, offering a reward
of one hundred guineas for apprehending him. All for the price of one
halfpenny_."

Petrified as I was at these amazing and dreadful sounds, I had the
temerity to go up to the man and purchase one of his papers. I was
desperately resolved to know the exact state of the fact, and what I had
to depend upon. I carried it with me a little way, till, no longer able
to endure the tumult of my impatience, I contrived to make out the chief
part of its contents, by the help of a lamp, at the upper end of a
narrow passage. I found it contain a greater number of circumstances
than could have been expected in this species of publication, I was
equalled to the most notorious housebreaker in the art of penetrating
through walls and doors, and to the most accomplished swindler in
plausibleness, duplicity, and disguise. The hand-bill which Larkins had
first brought to us upon the forest was printed at length. All my
disguises, previously to the last alarm that had been given me by the
providence of Mrs. Marney, were faithfully enumerated; and the public
were warned to be upon their watch against a person of an uncouth and
extraordinary appearance, and who lived in a recluse and solitary
manner. I also learned from this paper that my former lodgings had been
searched on the very evening of my escape, and that Mrs. Marney had been
sent to Newgate, upon a charge of misprision of felony.--This last
circumstance affected me deeply. In the midst of my own sufferings my
sympathies flowed undiminished. It was a most cruel and intolerable
idea, if I were not only myself to be an object of unrelenting
persecution, but my very touch were to be infectious, and every one that
succoured me was to be involved in the common ruin. My instant feeling
was that of a willingness to undergo the utmost malice of my enemies,
could I by that means have saved this excellent woman from alarm and
peril.--I afterwards learned that Mrs. Marney was delivered from
confinement, by the interposition of her noble relation.

My sympathy for Mrs. Marney however was at this moment a transient one.
A more imperious and irresistible consideration demanded to be heard.

With what sensations did I ruminate upon this paper? Every word of it
carried despair to my heart. The actual apprehension that I dreaded
would perhaps have been less horrible. It would have put an end to that
lingering terror to which I was a prey. Disguise was no longer of use. A
numerous class of individuals, through every department, almost every
house of the metropolis, would be induced to look with a suspicious eye
upon every stranger, especially every solitary stranger, that fell under
their observation. The prize of one hundred guineas was held out to
excite their avarice and sharpen their penetration. It was no longer
Bow-street, it was a million of men in arms against me. Neither had I the
refuge, which few men have been so miserable as to want, of one single
individual with whom to repose my alarms, and who might shelter me from
the gaze of indiscriminate curiosity.

What could exceed the horrors of this situation? My heart knocked
against my ribs, my bosom heaved, I gasped and panted for breath. "There
is no end then," said I, "to my persecutors! My unwearied and
long-continued labours lead to no termination! Termination! No; the
lapse of time, that cures all other things, makes my case more
desperate! Why then," exclaimed I, a new train of thought suddenly
rushing into my mind, "why should I sustain the contest any longer? I
can at least elude my persecutors in death. I can bury myself and the
traces of my existence together in friendly oblivion; and thus bequeath
eternal doubt, and ever new alarm, to those who have no peace but in
pursuing me!"

In the midst of the horrors with which I was now impressed, this idea
gave me pleasure; and I hastened to the Thames to put it in instant
execution. Such was the paroxysm of my mind that my powers of vision
became partially suspended. I was no longer conscious to the feebleness
of disease, but rushed along with fervent impetuosity. I passed from
street to street without observing what direction I pursued. After
wandering I know not how long, I arrived at London Bridge. I hastened to
the stairs, and saw the river covered with vessels.

"No human being must see me," said I, "at the instant that I vanish for
ever." This thought required some consideration. A portion of time had
elapsed since my first desperate purpose. My understanding began to
return. The sight of the vessels suggested to me the idea of once more
attempting to leave my native country.

I enquired, and speedily found that the cheapest passage I could procure
was in a vessel moored near the Tower, and which was to sail in a few
days for Middleburgh in Holland. I would have gone instantly on board,
and have endeavoured to prevail with the captain to let me remain there
till he sailed; but unfortunately I had not money enough in my pocket to
defray my passage.

It was worse than this. I had not money enough in the world. I however
paid the captain half his demand, and promised to return with the rest.
I knew not in what manner it was to be procured, but I believed that I
should not fail in it. I had some idea of applying to Mr. Spurrel.
Surely he would not refuse me? He appeared to love me with parental
affection, and I thought I might trust myself for a moment in his hands.

I approached my place of residence with a heavy and foreboding heart.
Mr. Spurrel was not at home; and I was obliged to wait for his return.
Worn out with fatigue, disappointment, and the ill state of my health, I
sunk upon a chair. Speedily however I recollected myself. I had work of
Mr. Spurrel's in my trunk, which had been delivered out to me that very
morning, to five times the amount I wanted. I canvassed for a moment
whether I should make use of this property as if it were my own; but I
rejected the idea with disdain. I had never in the smallest degree
merited the reproaches that were east upon me; and I determined I never
would merit them. I sat gasping, anxious, full of the blackest
forebodings. My terrors appeared, even to my own mind, greater and more
importunate than the circumstances authorised.

It was extraordinary that Mr. Spurrel should be abroad at this hour; I
had never known it happen before. His bed-time was between nine and ten.
Ten o'clock came, eleven o'clock, but not Mr. Spurrel. At midnight I
heard his knock at the door. Every soul in the house was in bed. Mr.
Spurrel, on account of his regular hours, was unprovided with a key to
open for himself. A gleam, a sickly gleam, of the social spirit came
over my heart. I flew nimbly down stairs, and opened the door.

I could perceive, by the little taper in my hand, something
extraordinary in his countenance. I had not time to speak, before I saw
two other men follow him. At the first glance I was sufficiently
assured what sort of persons they were. At the second, I perceived that
one of them was no other than Gines himself. I had understood formerly
that he had been of this profession, and I was not surprised to find him
in it again. Though I had for three hours endeavoured, as it were, to
prepare myself for the unavoidable necessity of falling once again into
the hands of the officers of law, the sensation I felt at their entrance
was indescribably agonising. I was besides not a little astonished at
the time and manner of their entrance; and I felt anxious to know
whether Mr. Spurrel could be base enough to have been their introducer.

I was not long held in perplexity. He no sooner saw his followers within
the door, than he exclaimed, with convulsive eagerness, "There, there,
that is your man! thank God! thank God!" Gines looked eagerly in my
face, with a countenance expressive alternately of hope and doubt, and
answered, "By God, and I do not know whether it be or no! I am afraid we
are in the wrong box!" Then recollecting himself, "We will go into the
house, and examine further however." We all went up stairs into Mr.
Spurrel's room; I set down the candle upon the table. I had hitherto
been silent; but I determined not to desert myself, and was a little
encouraged to exertion by the scepticism of Gines. With a calm and
deliberate manner therefore, in my feigned voice, one of the
characteristics of which was lisping, I asked, "Pray, gentlemen, what
may be your pleasure with me?"--"Why," said Gines, "our errand is with
one Caleb Williams, and a precious rascal he is! I ought to know the
chap well enough; but they say he has as many faces as there are days in
the year. So you please to pull off your face; or, if you cannot do
that, at least you can pull off your clothes, and let us see what your
hump is made of."

I remonstrated, but in vain. I stood detected in part of my artifice;
and Gines, though still uncertain, was every moment more and more
confirmed in his suspicions. Mr. Spurrel perfectly gloated, with eyes
that seemed ready to devour every thing that passed. As my imposture
gradually appeared more palpable, he repeated his exclamation, "Thank
God! thank God!" At last, tired with this scene of mummery, and
disgusted beyond measure with the base and hypocritical figure I seemed
to exhibit, I exclaimed, "Well, I am Caleb Williams; conduct me wherever
you please! And now, Mr. Spurrel!"--He gave a violent start. The
instant I declared myself his transport had been at the highest, and
was, to any power he was able to exert, absolutely uncontrollable. But
the unexpectedness of my address, and the tone in which I spoke,
electrified him.--"Is it possible," continued I, "that you should
have been the wretch to betray me? What have I done to deserve this
treatment? Is this the kindness you professed? the affection that was
perpetually in your mouth? to be the death of me!"

"My poor boy! my dear creature!" cried Spurrel, whimpering, and in a
tone of the humblest expostulation, "indeed I could not help it! I would
have helped it, if I could! I hope they will not hurt my darling! I am
sure I shall die if they do!"

"Miserable driveller!" interrupted I, with a stern voice, "do you betray
me into the remorseless fangs of the law, and then talk of my not being
hurt? I know my sentence, and am prepared to meet it! You have fixed the
halter upon my neck, and at the same price would have done so to your
only son! Go, count your accursed guineas! My life would have been
safer in the hands of one I had never seen than in yours, whose mouth
and whose eyes for ever ran over with crocodile affection!"

I have always believed that my sickness, and, as he apprehended,
approaching death, contributed its part to the treachery of Mr. Spurrel.
He predicted to his own mind the time when I should no longer be able to
work. He recollected with agony the expense that attended his son's
illness and death. He determined to afford me no assistance of a similar
kind. He feared however the reproach of deserting me. He feared the
tenderness of his nature. He felt, that I was growing upon his
affections, and that in a short time he could not have deserted me. He
was driven by a sort of implicit impulse, for the sake of avoiding one
ungenerous action, to take refuge in another, the basest and most
diabolical. This motive, conjoining with the prospect of the proffered
reward, was an incitement too powerful for him to resist.




CHAPTER XI.


Having given vent to my resentment, I left Mr. Spurrel motionless, and
unable to utter a word. Gines and his companion attended me. It is
unnecessary to repeat all the insolence of this man. He alternately
triumphed in the completion of his revenge, and regretted the loss of
the reward to the shrivelled old curmudgeon we had just quitted, whom
however he swore he would cheat of it by one means or another. He
claimed to himself the ingenuity of having devised the halfpenny legend,
the thought of which was all his own, and was an expedient that was
impossible to fail. There was neither law nor justice, he said, to be
had, if Hunks who had done nothing were permitted to pocket the cash,
and his merit were left undistinguished and pennyless.

I paid but little attention to his story. It struck upon my sense, and I
was able to recollect it at my nearest leisure, though I thought not of
it at the time. For the present I was busily employed, reflecting on my
new situation, and the conduct to be observed in it. The thought of
suicide had twice, in moments of uncommon despair, suggested itself to
my mind; but it was far from my habitual meditations. At present, and in
all cases where death was immediately threatened me from the injustice
of others, I felt myself disposed to contend to the last.

My prospects were indeed sufficiently gloomy and discouraging. How much
labour had I exerted, first to extricate myself from prison, and next to
evade the diligence of my pursuers; and the result of all, to be brought
back to the point from which I began! I had gained fame indeed, the
miserable fame to have my story bawled forth by hawkers and
ballad-mongers, to have my praises as an active and enterprising villain
celebrated among footmen and chambermaids; but I was neither an
Erostratus nor an Alexander, to die contented with that species of
eulogium. With respect to all that was solid, what chance could I find
in new exertions of a similar nature? Never was a human creature pursued
by enemies more inventive or envenomed. I could have small hope that
they would ever cease their persecution, or that my future attempts
would be crowned with a more desirable issue.

They were considerations like these that dictated my resolution. My mind
had been gradually weaning from Mr. Falkland, till its feeling rose to
something like abhorrence. I had long cherished a reverence for him,
which not even animosity and subornation on his part could utterly
destroy. But I now ascribed a character so inhumanly sanguinary to his
mind; I saw something so fiend-like in the thus hunting me round the
world, and determining to be satisfied with nothing less than my blood,
while at the same time he knew my innocence, my indisposition to
mischief, nay, I might add, my virtues; that henceforth I trampled
reverence and the recollection of former esteem under my feet. I lost
all regard to his intellectual greatness, and all pity for the agonies
of his soul. I also would abjure forbearance. I would show myself bitter
and inflexible as he had done. Was it wise in him to drive me into
extremity and madness? Had he no fears for his own secret and atrocious
offences?

I had been obliged to spend the remainder of the night upon which I had
been apprehended, in prison. During the interval I had thrown off every
vestige of disguise, and appeared the next morning in my own person. I
was of course easily identified; and, this being the whole with which
the magistrates before whom I now stood thought themselves concerned,
they were proceeding to make out an order for my being conducted back to
my own county. I suspended the despatch of this measure by observing
that I had something to disclose. This is an overture to which men
appointed for the administration of criminal justice never fail to
attend.

I went before the magistrates, to whose office Gines and his comrade
conducted me, fully determined to publish those astonishing secrets of
which I had hitherto been the faithful depository; and, once for all, to
turn the tables upon my accuser. It was time that the real criminal
should be the sufferer, and not that innocence should for ever labour
under the oppression of guilt.

I said that "I had always protested my innocence, and must now repeat
the protest."

"In that case," retorted the senior magistrate abruptly, "what can you
have to disclose? If you are innocent, that is no business of ours! We
act officially."

"I always declared," continued I, "that I was the perpetrator of no
guilt, but that the guilt wholly belonged to my accuser. He privately
conveyed these effects among my property, and then charged me with the
robbery. I now declare more than that, that this man is a murderer, that
I detected his criminality, and that, for that reason, he is determined
to deprive me of life. I presume, gentlemen, that you do consider it as
your business to take this declaration. I am persuaded you will be by no
means disposed, actively or passively, to contribute to the atrocious
injustice under which I suffer, to the imprisonment and condemnation of
an innocent man, in order that a murderer may go free. I suppressed this
story as long as I could. I was extremely averse to be the author of the
unhappiness or the death of a human being. But all patience and
submission have their limits."

"Give me leave, sir," rejoined the magistrate, with an air of affected
moderation, "to ask you two questions. Were you any way aiding,
abetting, or contributing to this murder?"

"No."

"And pray, sir, who is this Mr. Falkland? and what may have been the
nature of your connection with him?"

"Mr. Falkland is a gentleman of six thousand per annum. I lived with him
as his secretary."

"In other words, you were his servant?"

"As you please."

"Very well, sir; that is quite enough for me. First, I have to tell you,
as a magistrate, that I can have nothing to do with your declaration. If
you had been concerned in the murder you talk of, that would alter the
case. But it is out of all reasonable rule for a magistrate to take an
information from a felon, except against his accomplices. Next, I think
it right to observe to you, in my own proper person, that you appear to
me to be the most impudent rascal I ever saw. Why, are you such an ass
as to suppose, that the sort of story you have been telling, can be of
any service to you, either here or at the assizes, or any where else? A
fine time of it indeed it would be, if, when gentlemen of six thousand a
year take up their servants for robbing them, those servants could trump
up such accusations as these, and could get any magistrate or court of
justice to listen to them! Whether or no the felony with which you stand
charged would have brought you to the gallows, I will not pretend to
say: but I am sure this story will. There would be a speedy end to all
order and good government, if fellows that trample upon ranks and
distinctions in this atrocious sort were upon any consideration suffered
to get off."

"And do you refuse, sir, to attend to the particulars of the charge I
allege?"

"Yes, sir, I do.--But, if I did not, pray what witnesses have you of the
murder?"

This question staggered me.

"None. But I believe I can make out a circumstantial proof, of a nature
to force attention from the most indifferent hearer."

"So I thought.--Officers, take him from the bar!"

Such was the success of this ultimate resort on my part, upon which I
had built with such undoubting confidence. Till now, I had conceived
that the unfavourable situation in which I was placed was prolonged by
my own forbearance; and I had determined to endure all that human nature
could support, rather than have recourse to this extreme recrimination.
That idea secretly consoled me under all my calamities: it was a
voluntary sacrifice, and was cheerfully made. I thought myself allied to
the army of martyrs and confessors; I applauded my fortitude and
self-denial; and I pleased myself with the idea, that I had the power,
though I hoped never to employ it, by an unrelenting display of my
resources, to put an end at once to my sufferings and persecutions.

And this at last was the justice of mankind! A man, under certain
circumstances, shall not be heard in the detection of a crime, because
he has not been a participator of it! The story of a flagitious murder
shall be listened to with indifference, while an innocent man is hunted,
like a wild beast, to the furthest corners of the earth! Six thousand a
year shall protect a man from accusation; and the validity of an
impeachment shall be superseded, because the author of it is a servant!

I was conducted back to the very prison from which a few months before I
had made my escape. With a bursting heart I entered those walls,
compelled to feel that all my more than Herculean labours served for my
own torture, and for no other end. Since my escape from prison I had
acquired some knowledge of the world; I had learned by bitter
experience, by how many links society had a hold upon me, and how
closely the snares of despotism beset me. I no longer beheld the world,
as my youthful fancy had once induced me to do, as a scene in which to
hide or to appear, and to exhibit the freaks of a wanton vivacity. I saw
my whole species as ready, in one mode or other, to be made the
instruments of the tyrant. Hope died away in the bottom of my heart.
Shut up for the first night in my dungeon, I was seized at intervals
with temporary frenzy. From time to time, I rent the universal silence
with the roarings of unsupportable despair. But this was a transient
distraction. I soon returned to the sober recollection of myself and my
miseries.

My prospects were more gloomy, and my situation apparently more
irremediable, than ever. I was exposed again, if that were of any
account, to the insolence and tyranny that are uniformly exercised
within those walls. Why should I repeat the loathsome tale of all that
was endured by me, and is endured by every man who is unhappy enough to
fall under the government of these consecrated ministers of national
jurisprudence? The sufferings I had already experienced, my anxieties,
my flight, the perpetual expectation of being discovered, worse than the
discovery itself, would perhaps have been enough to satisfy the most
insensible individual, in the court of his own conscience, if I had even
been the felon I was pretended to be. But the law has neither eyes, nor
ears, nor bowels of humanity; and it turns into marble the hearts of all
those that are nursed in its principles.

I however once more recovered my spirit of determination. I resolved
that, while I had life, I would never be deserted by this spirit.
Oppressed, annihilated I might be; but, if I died, I would die
resisting. What use, what advantage, what pleasurable sentiment, could
arise from a tame surrender? There is no man that is ignorant, that to
humble yourself at the feet of the law is a bootless task; in her courts
there is no room for amendment and reformation.

My fortitude may to some persons appear above the standard of human
nature. But if I draw back the veil from my heart they will readily
confess their mistake. My heart bled at every pore. My resolution was
not the calm sentiment of philosophy and reason. It was a gloomy and
desperate purpose: the creature, not of hope, but of a mind austerely
held to its design, that felt, as it were, satisfied with the naked
effort, and prepared to give success or miscarriage to the winds. It was
to this miserable condition, which might awaken sympathy in the most
hardened bosom, that Mr. Falkland had reduced me.

In the mean time, strange as it may seem, here, in prison, subject to
innumerable hardships, and in the assured expectation of a sentence of
death, I recovered my health. I ascribe this to the state of my mind,
which was now changed, from perpetual anxiety, terror, and alarm, the
too frequent inmates of a prison, but which I upon this occasion did not
seem to bring along with me, to a desperate firmness.

I anticipated the event of my trial. I determined once more to escape
from my prison; nor did I doubt of my ability to effect at least this
first step towards my future preservation. The assizes however were
near, and there were certain considerations, unnecessary to be detailed,
that persuaded me there might be benefit in waiting till my trial should
actually be terminated, before I made my attempt.

It stood upon the list as one of the latest to be brought forward. I was
therefore extremely surprised to find it called out of its order, early
on the morning of the second day. But, if this were unexpected, how
much greater was my astonishment, when my prosecutor was called, to
find neither Mr. Falkland, nor Mr. Forester, nor a single individual of
any description, appear against me! The recognizances into which my
prosecutors had entered were declared to be forfeited; and I was
dismissed without further impediment from the bar.

The effect which this incredible reverse produced upon my mind it is
impossible to express. I, who had come to that bar with the sentence of
death already in idea ringing in my ears, to be told that I was free to
transport myself whithersoever I pleased! Was it for this that I had
broken through so many locks and bolts, and the adamantine walls of my
prison; that I had passed so many anxious days, and sleepless,
spectre-haunted nights; that I had racked my invention for expedients of
evasion and concealment; that my mind had been roused to an energy of
which I could scarcely have believed it capable; that my existence had
been enthralled to an ever-living torment, such as I could scarcely have
supposed it in man to endure? Great God! what is man? Is he thus blind
to the future, thus totally unsuspecting of what is to occur in the next
moment of his existence? I have somewhere read, that heaven in mercy
hides from us the future incidents of our life. My own experience does
not well accord with this assertion. In this instance at least I should
have been saved from insupportable labour and undescribable anguish,
could I have foreseen the catastrophe of this most interesting
transaction.




CHAPTER XII.


It was not long before I took my everlasting leave of this detested and
miserable scene. My heart was for the present too full of astonishment
and exultation in my unexpected deliverance, to admit of anxiety about
the future. I withdrew from the town; I rambled with a slow and
thoughtful pace, now bursting with exclamation, and now buried in
profound and undefinable reverie. Accident led me towards the very heath
which had first sheltered me, when, upon a former occasion, I broke out
of my prison. I wandered among its cavities and its valleys. It was a
forlorn and desolate solitude. I continued here I know not how long.
Night at length overtook me unperceived, and I prepared to return for
the present to the town I had quitted.

It was now perfectly dark, when two men, whom I had not previously
observed, sprung upon me from behind. They seized me by the arms, and
threw me upon the ground. I had no time for resistance or recollection.
I could however perceive that one of them was the diabolical Gines. They
blindfolded, gagged me, and hurried me I knew not whither. As we passed
along in silence, I endeavoured to conjecture what could be the meaning
of this extraordinary violence. I was strongly impressed with the idea,
that, after the event of this morning, the most severe and painful part
of my history was past; and, strange as it may seem, I could not
persuade myself to regard with alarm this unexpected attack. It might
however be some new project, suggested by the brutal temper and
unrelenting animosity of Gines.

I presently found that we were returned into the town I had just
quitted. They led me into a house, and, as soon as they had taken
possession of a room freed me from the restraints they had before
imposed Here Gines informed me with a malicious grin that no harm was
intended me, and therefore I should show most sense in keeping myself
quiet. I perceived that we were in an inn; I overheard company in a room
at no great distance from us, and therefore was now as thoroughly aware
as he could be, that there was at present little reason to stand in fear
of any species of violence, and that it would be time enough to resist,
when they attempted to conduct me from the inn in the same manner that
they had brought me into it. I was not without some curiosity to see the
conclusion that was to follow upon so extraordinary a commencement.

The preliminaries I have described were scarcely completed, before Mr.
Falkland entered the room. I remember Collins, when he first
communicated to me the particulars of our patron's history, observed
that he was totally unlike the man he had once been. I had no means of
ascertaining the truth of that observation. But it was strikingly
applicable to the spectacle which now presented itself to my eyes,
though, when I last beheld this unhappy man, he had been a victim to the
same passions, a prey to the same undying remorse, as now. Misery was at
that time inscribed in legible characters upon his countenance. But now
he appeared like nothing that had ever been visible in human shape. His
visage was haggard, emaciated, and fleshless. His complexion was a dun
and tarnished red, the colour uniform through every region of the face,
and suggested the idea of its being burnt and parched by the eternal
fire that burned within him. His eyes were red, quick, wandering, full
of suspicion and rage. His hair was neglected, ragged, and floating.
His whole figure was thin, to a degree that suggested the idea rather of
a skeleton than a person actually alive. Life seemed hardly to be the
capable inhabitant of so woe-begone and ghost-like a figure. The taper
of wholesome life was expired; but passion, and fierceness, and frenzy,
were able for the present to supply its place.

I was to the utmost degree astonished and shocked at the sight of
him.--He sternly commanded my conductors to leave the room.

"Well, sir, I have this day successfully exerted myself to save your
life from the gallows. A fortnight ago you did what you were able to
bring my life to that ignominious close.

"Were you so stupid and undistinguishing as not to know that the
preservation of your life was the uniform object of my exertions? Did
not I maintain you in prison? Did not I endeavour to prevent your being
sent thither? Could you mistake the bigoted and obstinate conduct of
Forester, in offering a hundred guineas for your apprehension, for mine?

"I had my eye upon you in all your wanderings. You have taken no
material step through their whole course with which I have not been
acquainted. I meditated to do you good. I have spilt no blood but that
of Tyrrel: that was in the moment of passion; and it has been the
subject of my uninterrupted and hourly remorse. I have connived at no
man's fate but that of the Hawkinses: they could no otherwise have been
saved, than by my acknowledging myself a murderer. The rest of my life
has been spent in acts of benevolence.

"I meditated to do you good. For that reason I was willing to prove you.
You pretended to act towards me with consideration and forbearance. If
you had persisted in that to the end, I would yet have found a way to
reward you. I left you to your own discretion. You might show the
impotent malignity of your own heart; but, in the circumstances in which
you were then placed, I knew you could not hurt me. Your forbearance has
proved, as I all along suspected, empty and treacherous. You have
attempted to blast my reputation. You have sought to disclose the select
and eternal secret of my soul. Because you have done that, I will never
forgive you. I will remember it to my latest breath. The memory shall
survive me, when my existence is no more. Do you think you are out of
the reach of my power, because a court of justice has acquitted you?"

While Mr. Falkland was speaking a sudden distemper came over his
countenance, his whole frame was shaken by an instantaneous convulsion,
and he staggered to a chair. In about three minutes he recovered.

"Yes," said he, "I am still alive. I shall live for days, and months,
and years; the power that made me, of whatever kind it be, can only
determine how long. I live the guardian of my reputation. That, and to
endure a misery such as man never endured, are the only ends to which I
live. But, when I am no more, my fame shall still survive. My character
shall be revered as spotless and unimpeachable by all posterity, as long
as the name of Falkland shall be repeated in the most distant regions of
the many-peopled globe."

Having said this, he returned to the discourse which more immediately
related to my future condition and happiness.

"There is one condition," said he, "upon which you may obtain some
mitigation of your future calamity. It is for that purpose that I have
sent for you. Listen to my proposal with deliberation and sobriety.
Remember, that the insanity is not less to trifle with the resolved
determination of my soul, than it would be to pull a mountain upon your
head that hung trembling upon the edge of the mighty Apennine!

"I insist then upon your signing a paper, declaring, in the most solemn
manner, that I am innocent of murder, and that the charge you alleged at
the office in Bow-street is false, malicious, and groundless. Perhaps
you may scruple out of a regard to truth. Is truth then entitled to
adoration for its own sake, and not for the sake of the happiness it is
calculated to produce? Will a reasonable man sacrifice to barren truth,
when benevolence, humanity, and every consideration that is dear to the
human heart, require that it should be superseded? It is probable that I
may never make use of this paper, but I require it, as the only
practicable reparation to the honour you have assailed. This is what I
had to propose. I expect your answer."

"Sir," answered I, "I have heard you to an end, and I stand in need of
no deliberation to enable me to answer you in the negative. You took me
up a raw and inexperienced boy, capable of being moulded to any form you
pleased. But you have communicated to me volumes of experience in a very
short period. I am no longer irresolute and pliable. What is the power
you retain over my fate I am unable to discover. You may destroy me; but
you cannot make me tremble. I am not concerned to enquire, whether what
I have suffered flowed from you by design or otherwise; whether you were
the author of my miseries, or only connived at them. This I know, that I
have suffered too exquisitely on your account, for me to feel the least
remaining claim on your part to my making any voluntary sacrifice.

"You say that benevolence and humanity require this sacrifice of me. No;
it would only be a sacrifice to your mad and misguided love of fame,--to
that passion which has been the source of all your miseries, of the most
tragical calamities to others, and of every misfortune that has happened
to me. I have no forbearance to exercise towards that passion. If you be
not yet cured of this tremendous and sanguinary folly, at least I will
do nothing to cherish it. I know not whether from my youth I was
destined for a hero; but I may thank you for having taught me a lesson
of insurmountable fortitude.

"What is it that you require of me? that I should sign away my own
reputation for the better maintaining of yours. Where is the equality of
that? What is it that casts me at such an immense distance below you, as
to make every thing that relates to me wholly unworthy of consideration?
You have been educated in the prejudice of birth. I abhor that
prejudice. You have made me desperate, and I utter what that desperation
suggests.

"You will tell me perhaps that I have no reputation to lose; that, while
you are esteemed faultless and unblemished, I am universally reputed a
thief, a suborner, and a calumniator. Be it so. I will never do any
thing to countenance those imputations. The more I am destitute of the
esteem of mankind, the more careful I will be to preserve my own. I will
never from fear, or any other mistaken motive, do any thing of which I
ought to be ashamed.

"You are determined to be for ever my enemy. I have in no degree
deserved this eternal abhorrence. I have always esteemed and pitied you.
For a considerable time I rather chose to expose myself to every kind
of misfortune, than disclose the secret that was so dear to you. I was
not deterred by your menaces--(what could you make me suffer more than
I actually suffered?)--but by the humanity of my own heart; in which,
and not in means of violence, you ought to have reposed your confidence.
What is the mysterious vengeance that you can yet execute against me?
You menaced me before; you can menace no worse now. You are wearing out
the springs of terror. Do with me as you please; you teach me to hear
you with an unshrinking and desperate firmness. Recollect yourself! I
did not proceed to the step with which you reproach me, till I was
apparently urged to the very last extremity. I had suffered as much as
human nature can suffer; I had lived in the midst of eternal alarm and
unintermitted watchfulness; I had twice been driven to purposes of
suicide. I am now sorry however, that the step of which you complain was
ever adopted. But, urged to exasperation by an unintermitted rigour, I
had no time to cool or to deliberate. Even at present I cherish no
vengeance against you. All that is reasonable, all that can really
contribute to your security, I will readily concede; but I will not be
driven to an act repugnant to all reason, integrity, and justice."

Mr. Falkland listened to me with astonishment and impatience. He had
entertained no previous conception of the firmness I displayed. Several
times he was convulsed with the fury that laboured in his breast. Once
and again he betrayed an intention to interrupt; but he was restrained
by the collectedness of my manner, and perhaps by a desire to be
acquainted with the entire state of my mind. Finding that I had
concluded, he paused for a moment; his passion seemed gradually to
enlarge, till it was no longer capable of control.

"It is well!" said he, gnashing his teeth, and stamping upon the ground.
"You refuse the composition I offer! I have no power to persuade you to
compliance! You defy me! At least I have a power respecting you, and
that power I will exercise; a power that shall grind you into atoms. I
condescend to no more expostulation. I know what I am, and what I can
be. I know what you are, and what fate is reserved for you!"

Saying this he quitted the room.

Such were the particulars of this memorable scene. The impression it has
left upon my understanding is indelible. The figure and appearance of
Mr. Falkland, his death-like weakness and decay, his more than mortal
energy and rage, the words that he spoke, the motives that animated him,
produced one compounded effect upon my mind that nothing of the same
nature could ever parallel. The idea of his misery thrilled through my
frame. How weak in comparison of it is the imaginary hell, which the
great enemy of mankind is represented as carrying every where about with
him!

From this consideration, my mind presently turned to the menaces he had
vented against myself. They were all mysterious and undefined. He had
talked of power, but had given no hint from which I could collect in
what he imagined it to consist. He had talked of misery, but had not
dropped a syllable respecting the nature of the misery to be inflicted.

I sat still for some time, ruminating on these thoughts. Neither Mr.
Falkland nor any other person appeared to disturb my meditations. I
rose, went out of the room, and from the inn into the street. No one
offered to molest me. It was strange! What was the nature of this
power, from which I was to apprehend so much, yet which seemed to leave
me at perfect liberty? I began to imagine that all I had heard from this
dreadful adversary was mere madness and extravagance, and that he was at
length deprived of the use of reason, which had long served him only as
a medium of torment. Yet was it likely in that case that he should be
able to employ Gines and his associate, who had just been his
instruments of violence upon my person?

I proceeded along the streets with considerable caution. I looked before
me and behind me, as well as the darkness would allow me to do, that I
might not again be hunted in sight by some men of stratagem and violence
without my perceiving it. I went not, as before, beyond the limits of
the town, but considered the streets, the houses, and the inhabitants,
as affording some degree of security. I was still walking with my mind
thus full of suspicion and forecast, when I discovered Thomas, that
servant of Mr. Falkland whom I have already more than once had occasion
to mention. He advanced towards me with an air so blunt and direct, as
instantly to remove from me the idea of any thing insidious in his
purpose; besides that I had always felt the character of Thomas, rustic
and uncultivated as it was, to be entitled to a more than common portion
of esteem.

"Thomas," said I, as he advanced, "I hope you are willing to give me
joy, that I am at length delivered from the dreadful danger which for
many months haunted me so unmercifully."

"No," rejoined Thomas, roughly; "I be not at all willing. I do not know
what to make of myself in this affair. While you were in prison in that
miserable fashion, I felt all at one almost as if I loved you: and now
that that is over, and you are turned out loose in the world to do your
worst, my blood rises at the very sight of you. To look at you, you are
almost that very lad Williams for whom I could with pleasure, as it
were, have laid down my life; and yet, behind that smiling face there
lie robbery, and lying, and every thing that is ungrateful and
murderous. Your last action was worse than all the rest. How could you
find in your heart to revive that cruel story about Mr. Tyrrel, which
every body had agreed, out of regard to the squire, never to mention
again, and of which I know, and you know, he is as innocent as the child
unborn? There are causes and reasons, or else I could have wished from
the bottom of my soul never to have set eyes on you again."

"And you still persist in your hard thoughts of me?"

"Worse! I think worse of you than ever! Before, I thought you as bad as
man could be. I wonder from my soul what you are to do next. But you
make good the old saying, 'Needs must go, that the devil drives.'"

"And so there is never to be an end of my misfortunes! What can Mr.
Falkland contrive for me worse than the ill opinion and enmity of all
mankind?"

"Mr. Falkland contrive! He is the best friend you have in the world,
though you are the basest traitor to him. Poor man! it makes one's heart
ache to look at him; he is the very image of grief. And it is not clear
to me that it is not all owing to you. At least you have given the
finishing lift to the misfortune that was already destroying him. There
have been the devil and all to pay between him and squire Forester. The
squire is right raving mad with my master, for having outwitted him in
the matter of the trial, and saved your life. He swears that you shall
be taken up and tried all over again at the next assizes; but my master
is resolute, and I believe will carry it his own way. He says indeed
that the law will not allow squire Forester to have his will in this. To
see him ordering every thing for your benefit, and taking all your
maliciousness as mild and innocent as a lamb, and to think of your vile
proceedings against him, is a sight one shall not see again, go all the
world over. For God's sake, repent of your reprobate doings, and make
what little reparation is in your power! Think of your poor soul, before
you awake, as to be sure one of these days you will, in fire and
brimstone everlasting!"

Saying this, he held out his hand and took hold of mine. The action
seemed strange; but I at first thought it the unpremeditated result of
his solemn and well-intended adjuration. I felt however that he put
something into my hand. The next moment he quitted his hold, and
hastened from me with the swiftness of an arrow. What he had thus given
me was a bank-note of twenty pounds. I had no doubt that he had been
charged to deliver it to me from Mr. Falkland.

What was I to infer? what light did it throw upon the intentions of my
inexorable persecutor? his animosity against me was as great as ever;
that I had just had confirmed to me from his own mouth. Yet his
animosity appeared to be still tempered with the remains of humanity. He
prescribed to it a line, wide enough to embrace the gratification of his
views, and within the boundaries of that line it stopped. But this
discovery carried no consolation to my mind. I knew not what portion of
calamity I was fated to endure, before his jealousy of dishonour, and
inordinate thirst of fame would deem themselves satisfied.

Another question offered itself. Was I to receive the money which had
just been put into my hands? the money of a man who had inflicted upon
me injuries, less than those which he had entailed upon himself, but the
greatest that one man can inflict upon another? who had blasted my
youth, who had destroyed my peace, who had held me up to the abhorrence
of mankind, and rendered me an outcast upon the face of the earth? who
had forced the basest and most atrocious falsehoods, and urged them with
a seriousness and perseverance which produced universal belief? who, an
hour before, had vowed against me inexorable enmity, and sworn to entail
upon me misery without end? Would not this conduct on my part betray a
base and abject spirit, that crouched under tyranny, and kissed the
hands that were imbrued in my blood?

If these reasons appeared strong, neither was the other side without
reasons in reply. I wanted the money: not for any purpose of vice or
superfluity, but for those purposes without which life cannot subsist.
Man ought to be able, wherever placed, to find for himself the means of
existence; but I was to open a new scene of life, to remove to some
distant spot, to be prepared against all the ill-will of mankind, and
the unexplored projects of hostility of a most accomplished foe. The
actual means of existence are the property of all. What should hinder me
from taking that of which I was really in want, when, in taking it, I
risked no vengeance, and perpetrated no violence? The property in
question will be beneficial to me, and the voluntary surrender of it is
accompanied with no injury to its late proprietor; what other condition
can be necessary to render the use of it on my part a duty? He that
lately possessed it has injured me; does that alter its value as a
medium of exchange? He will boast, perhaps of the imaginary obligation
he has conferred on me: surely to shrink from a thing in itself right
from any such apprehension, can be the result only of pusillanimity and
cowardice!




CHAPTER XIII.


Influenced by these reasonings, I determined to retain what had thus
been put into my hands. My next care was in regard to the scene I should
choose, as the retreat of that life which I had just saved from the
grasp of the executioner. The danger to which I was exposed of forcible
interruption in my pursuits, was probably, in some respects, less now
than it had been previously to this crisis. Besides, that I was
considerably influenced in this deliberation by the strong loathing I
conceived for the situations in which I had lately been engaged. I knew
not in what mode Mr. Falkland intended to exercise his vengeance against
me; but I was seized with so unconquerable an aversion to disguise, and
the idea of spending my life in personating a fictitious character, that
I could not, for the present at least, reconcile my mind to any thing of
that nature. The same kind of disgust I had conceived for the
metropolis, where I had spent so many hours of artifice, sadness, and
terror. I therefore decided in favour of the project which had formerly
proved amusing to my imagination, of withdrawing to some distant, rural
scene, a scene of calmness and obscurity, where for a few years at
least, perhaps during the life of Mr. Falkland, I might be hidden from
the world, recover the wounds my mind had received in this fatal
connection, methodise and improve the experience which had been
accumulated, cultivate the faculties I in any degree possessed, and
employ the intervals of these occupations in simple industry, and the
intercourse of guileless, uneducated, kind-intentioned minds. The
menaces of my persecutor seemed to forebode the inevitable interruption
of this system. But I deemed it wise to put these menaces out of my
consideration I compared them to death, which must infallibly overtake
us we know not when; but the possibility of whose arrival next year,
next week, to-morrow, must be left out of the calculation of him who
would enter upon any important or well-concerted undertaking.

Such were the ideas that determined my choice. Thus did my youthful mind
delineate the system of distant years, even when the threats of instant
calamity still sounded in my ears. I was inured to the apprehension of
mischief, till at last the hoarse roarings of the beginning tempest had
lost their power of annihilating my peace. I however thought it
necessary, while I was most palpably within the sphere of the enemy, to
exert every practicable degree of vigilance. I was careful not to incur
the hazards of darkness and solitude. When I left the town it was with
the stage-coach, an obvious source of protection against glaring and
enormous violence. Meanwhile I found myself no more exposed to
molestation in my progress, than the man in the world who should have
had the least reason for apprehensions of this nature. As the distance
increased, I relaxed something in my precaution, though still awake to a
sense of danger, and constantly pursued with the image of my foe. I
fixed upon an obscure market-town in Wales as the chosen seat of my
operations. This place recommended itself to my observation as I was
wandering in quest of an abode. It was clean, cheerful, and of great
simplicity of appearance. It was at a distance from any public and
frequented road, and had nothing which could deserve the name of trade.
The face of nature around it was agreeably diversified, being partly
wild and romantic, and partly rich and abundant in production.

Here I solicited employment in two professions; the first, that of a
watchmaker, in which though the instructions I had received were few,
they were eked out and assisted by a mind fruitful in mechanical
invention; the other, that of an instructor in mathematics and its
practical application, geography, astronomy, land-surveying, and
navigation. Neither of these was a very copious source of emolument in
the obscure retreat I had chosen for myself; but, if my receipts were
slender, my disbursements were still fewer. In this little town I became
acquainted with the vicar, the apothecary, the lawyer, and the rest of
the persons who, time out of mind, had been regarded as the top gentry
of the place. Each of these centred in himself a variety of occupations.
There was little in the appearance of the vicar that reminded you of his
profession, except on the recurring Sunday. At other times he
condescended, with his evangelical hand to guide the plough, or to drive
the cows from the field to the farm-yard for the milking. The apothecary
occasionally officiated as a barber, and the lawyer was the village
schoolmaster.

By all these persons I was received with kindness and hospitality. Among
people thus remote from the bustle of human life there is an open spirit
of confidence, by means of which a stranger easily finds access to their
benevolence and good-will. My manners had never been greatly debauched
from the simplicity of rural life by the scenes through which I had
passed; and the hardships I had endured had given additional mildness to
my character. In the theatre upon which I was now placed I had no rival.
My mechanical occupation had hitherto been a non-resident; and the
schoolmaster, who did not aspire to the sublime heights of science I
professed to communicate, was willing to admit me as a partner in the
task of civilising the unpolished manners of the inhabitants. For the
parson, civilisation was no part of his trade; his business was with the
things of a better life, not with the carnal concerns of this material
scene; in truth, his thoughts were principally occupied with his oatmeal
and his cows.

These however were not the only companions which this remote retirement
afforded me. There was a family of a very different description, of
which I gradually became the chosen intimate. The father was a shrewd,
sensible, rational man, but who had turned his principal attention to
subjects of agriculture. His wife was a truly admirable and
extraordinary woman. She was the daughter of a Neapolitan nobleman, who,
after having visited, and made a considerable figure, in every country
in Europe, had at length received the blow of fate in this village. He
had been banished his country upon suspicion of religious and political
heresy, and his estates confiscated. With this only child, like Prospero
in the Tempest, he had withdrawn himself to one of the most obscure and
uncultivated regions of the world. Very soon however after his arrival
in Wales he had been seized with a malignant fever, which carried him
off in three days. He died possessed of no other property than a few
jewels, and a bill of credit, to no considerable amount, upon an English
banker.

Here then was the infant Laura, left in a foreign country, and without
a single friend. The father of her present husband was led by motives of
pure humanity to seek to mitigate the misfortunes of the dying Italian.
Though a plain uninstructed man, with no extraordinary refinement of
intellect, there was something in his countenance that determined the
stranger in his present forlorn and melancholy situation, to make him
his executor, and the guardian of his daughter. The Neapolitan
understood enough of English to explain his wishes to this friendly
attendant of his death-bed. As his circumstances were narrow, the
servants of the stranger, two Italians, a male and a female, were sent
back to their own country soon after the death of their master.

Laura was at this time eight years of age. At these tender years she had
been susceptible of little direct instruction; and, as she grew up, even
the memory of her father became, from year to year, more vague and
indistinct in her mind. But there was something she derived from her
father, whether along with the life he bestowed, or as the consequence
of his instruction and manners, which no time could efface. Every added
year of her life contributed to develop the fund of her accomplishments.
She read, she observed, she reflected. Without instructors, she taught
herself to draw, to sing, and to understand the more polite European
languages. As she had no society in this remote situation but that of
peasants, she had no idea of honour or superiority to be derived from
her acquisitions; but pursued them from a secret taste, and as the
sources of personal enjoyment.

A mutual attachment gradually arose between her and the only son of her
guardian. His father led him, from early youth, to the labours and the
sports of the field, and there was little congeniality between his
pursuits and those of Laura. But this was a defect that she was slow to
discover. She had never been accustomed to society in her chosen
amusements, and habit at that time even made her conceive, that they
were indebted to solitude for an additional relish. The youthful rustic
had great integrity, great kindness of heart, and was a lad of excellent
sense. He was florid, well-proportioned, and the goodness of his
disposition made his manners amiable. Accomplishments greater than these
she had never seen in human form, since the death of her father. In
fact, she is scarcely to be considered as a sufferer in this instance;
since, in her forlorn and destitute condition, it is little probable,
when we consider the habits and notions that now prevail, that her
accomplishments, unassisted by fortune, would have procured her an equal
alliance in marriage.

When she became a mother her heart opened to a new affection. The idea
now presented itself, which had never occurred before, that in her
children at least she might find the partners and companions of her
favourite employments. She was, at the time of my arrival, mother of
four, the eldest of which was a son. To all of them she had been a most
assiduous instructor. It was well for her perhaps that she obtained this
sphere for the exercise of her mind. It came just at the period when the
charm which human life derives from novelty is beginning to wear off. It
gave her new activity and animation. It is perhaps impossible that the
refinements of which human nature is capable should not, after a time,
subside into sluggishness, if they be not aided by the influence of
society and affection.

The son of the Welch farmer by this admirable woman was about seventeen
years of age at the time of my settlement in their neighbourhood. His
eldest sister was one year younger than himself. The whole family
composed a group, with which a lover of tranquillity and virtue would
have delighted to associate in any situation. It is easy therefore to
conceive how much I rejoiced in their friendship, in this distant
retirement, and suffering, as I felt myself, from the maltreatment and
desertion of my species. The amiable Laura had a wonderful quickness of
eye, and rapidity of apprehension; but this feature in her countenance
was subdued by a sweetness of disposition, such as I never in any other
instance saw expressed in the looks of a human being. She soon
distinguished me by her kindness and friendship; for, living as she had
done, though familiar with the written productions of a cultivated
intellect, she had never seen the thing itself realised in a living
being, except in the person of her father. She delighted to converse
with me upon subjects of literature and taste, and she eagerly invited
my assistance in the education of her children. The son, though young,
had been so happily improved and instructed by his mother, that I found
in him nearly all the most essential qualities we require in a friend.
Engagement and inclination equally led me to pass a considerable part of
every day in this agreeable society. Laura treated me as if I had been
one of the family; and I sometimes flattered myself that I might one day
become such in reality. What an enviable resting-place for me, who had
known nothing but calamity, and had scarcely dared to look for sympathy
and kindness in the countenance of a human being!

The sentiments of friendship which early disclosed themselves between me
and the member of this amiable family daily became stronger. At every
interview, the confidence reposed in me by the mother increased. While
our familiarity gained in duration, it equally gained in that subtlety
of communication by which it seemed to shoot forth its roots in every
direction. There are a thousand little evanescent touches in the
development of a growing friendship, that are neither thought of, nor
would be understood, between common acquaintances. I honoured and
esteemed the respectable Laura like a mother; for, though the difference
of our ages was by no means sufficient to authorise the sentiment, it
was irresistibly suggested to me by the fact of her always being
presented to my observation under the maternal character. Her son was a
lad of great understanding, generosity, and feeling, and of no
contemptible acquirements; while his tender years, and the uncommon
excellence of his mother, subtracted something from the independence of
his judgment, and impressed him with a sort of religious deference for
her will. In the eldest daughter I beheld the image of Laura; for that I
felt attached to her for the present; and I sometimes conceived it
probable that hereafter I might learn to love her for her own
sake.--Alas, it was thus that I amused myself with the visions of distant
years, while I stood in reality on the brink of the precipice!

It will perhaps be thought strange that I never once communicated the
particulars of my story to this amiable matron, or to my young friend,
for such I may also venture to call him, her son. But in truth I
abhorred the memory of this story; I placed all my hopes of happiness in
the prospect of its being consigned to oblivion. I fondly flattered
myself that such would be the event: in the midst of my unlooked-for
happiness, I scarcely recollected, or, recollecting, was disposed to
yield but a small degree of credit to, the menaces of Mr. Falkland.

One day, that I was sitting alone with the accomplished Laura, she
repeated his all-dreadful name. I started with astonishment, amazed
that a woman like this, who knew nobody, who lived as it were alone in a
corner of the universe, who had never in a single instance entered into
any fashionable circle, this admirable and fascinating hermit, should,
by some unaccountable accident, have become acquainted with this fatal
and tremendous name. Astonishment however was not my only sensation. I
became pale with terror; I rose from my seat; I attempted to sit down
again; I reeled out of the room, and hastened to bury myself in
solitude. The unexpectedness of the incident took from me all
precaution, and overwhelmed my faculties. The penetrating Laura observed
my behaviour; but nothing further occurred to excite her attention to it
at that time; and, concluding from my manner that enquiry would be
painful to me, she humanely suppressed her curiosity.

I afterwards found that Mr. Falkland had been known to the father of
Laura; that he had been acquainted with the story of Count Malvesi, and
with a number of other transactions redounding in the highest degree to
the credit of the gallant Englishman. The Neapolitan had left letters in
which these transactions were recorded, and which spoke of Mr. Falkland
in the highest terms of panegyric. Laura had been used to regard every
little relic of her father with a sort of religious veneration; and, by
this accident, the name of Mr. Falkland was connected in her mind with
the sentiments of unbounded esteem.

The scene by which I was surrounded was perhaps more grateful to me,
than it would have been to most other persons with my degree of
intellectual cultivation. Sore with persecution and distress, and
bleeding at almost every vein, there was nothing I so much coveted as
rest and tranquillity. It seemed as if my faculties were, at least for
the time, exhausted by the late preternatural intensity of their
exertions, and that they stood indispensably in need of a period of
comparative suspension.

This was however but a temporary feeling. My mind had always been
active, and I was probably indebted to the sufferings I had endured, and
the exquisite and increased susceptibility they produced, for new
energies. I soon felt the desire of some additional and vigorous
pursuit. In this state of mind, I met by accident, in a neglected corner
of the house of one of my neighbours, with a general dictionary of four
of the northern languages. This incident gave a direction to my
thoughts. In my youth I had not been inattentive to languages. I
determined to attempt, at least for my own use, an etymological analysis
of the English language. I easily perceived, that this pursuit had one
advantage to a person in my situation, and that a small number of books,
consulted with this view, would afford employment for a considerable
time. I procured other dictionaries. In my incidental reading, I noted
the manner in which words were used, and applied these remarks to the
illustration of my general enquiry. I was unintermitted in my assiduity,
and my collections promised to accumulate. Thus I was provided with
sources both of industry and recreation, the more completely to divert
my thoughts from the recollection of my past misfortunes.

In this state, so grateful to my feelings, week after week glided away
without interruption and alarm. The situation in which I was now placed
had some resemblance to that in which I had spent my earlier years, with
the advantage of a more attractive society, and a riper judgment. I
began to look back upon the intervening period as upon a distempered and
tormenting dream; or rather perhaps my feelings were like those of a
man recovered from an interval of raging delirium, from ideas of horror,
confusion, flight, persecution, agony, and despair! When I recollected
what I had undergone, it was not without satisfaction, as the
recollection of a thing that was past; every day augmented my hope that
it was never to return. Surely the dark and terrific menaces of Mr.
Falkland were rather the perturbed suggestions of his angry mind, than
the final result of a deliberate and digested system! How happy should I
feel, beyond the ordinary lot of man, if, after the terrors I had
undergone, I should now find myself unexpectedly restored to the
immunities of a human being!

While I was thus soothing my mind with fond imaginations, it happened
that a few bricklayers and their labourers came over from a distance of
five or six miles, to work upon some additions to one of the better sort
of houses in the town, which had changed its tenant. No incident could
be more trivial than this, had it not been for a strange coincidence of
time between this circumstance, and a change which introduced itself
into my situation. This first manifested itself in a sort of shyness
with which I was treated, first by one person, and then another, of my
new-formed acquaintance. They were backward to enter into conversation
with me, and answered my enquiries with an awkward and embarrassed air.
When they met me in the street or the field, their countenances
contracted a cloud, and they endeavoured to shun me. My scholars quitted
me one after another; and I had no longer any employment in my
mechanical profession. It is impossible to describe the sensations,
which the gradual but uninterrupted progress of this revolution produced
in my mind. It seemed as if I had some contagious disease, from which
every man shrunk with alarm, and left me to perish unassisted and alone.
I asked one man and another to explain to me the meaning of these
appearances; but every one avoided the task, and answered in an evasive
and ambiguous manner. I sometimes supposed that it was all a delusion of
the imagination; till the repetition of the sensation brought the
reality too painfully home to my apprehension. There are few things that
give a greater shock to the mind, than a phenomenon in the conduct of
our fellow men, of great importance to our concerns, and for which we
are unable to assign any plausible reason. At times I was half inclined
to believe that the change was not in other men, but that some
alienation of my own understanding generated the horrid vision. I
endeavoured to awaken from my dream, and return to my former state of
enjoyment and happiness; but in vain. To the same consideration it may
be ascribed, that, unacquainted with the source of the evil, observing
its perpetual increase, and finding it, so far as I could perceive,
entirely arbitrary in its nature, I was unable to ascertain its limits,
or the degree in which it would finally overwhelm me.

In the midst however of the wonderful and seemingly inexplicable nature
of this scene, there was one idea that instantly obtruded itself, and
that I could never after banish from my mind. It is Falkland! In vain I
struggled against the seeming improbability of the supposition. In vain
I said, "Mr. Falkland, wise as he is, and pregnant in resources, acts by
human, not by supernatural means. He may overtake me by surprise, and in
a manner of which I had no previous expectation; but he cannot produce a
great and notorious effect without some visible agency, however
difficult it may be to trace that agency to its absolute author. He
cannot, like those invisible personages who are supposed from time to
time to interfere in human affairs, ride in the whirlwind, shroud
himself in clouds and impenetrable darkness, and scatter destruction
upon the earth from his secret habitation." Thus it was that I bribed my
imagination, and endeavoured to persuade myself that my present
unhappiness originated in a different source from my former. All evils
appeared trivial to me, in comparison with the recollection and
perpetuation of my parent misfortune. I felt like a man distracted, by
the incoherence of my ideas to my present situation, excluding from it
the machinations of Mr. Falkland, on the one hand; and on the other, by
the horror I conceived at the bare possibility of again encountering his
animosity, after a suspension of many weeks, a suspension as I had hoped
for ever. An interval like this was an age to a person in the calamitous
situation I had so long experienced. But, in spite of my efforts, I
could not banish from my mind the dreadful idea. My original conceptions
of the genius and perseverance of Mr. Falkland had been such, that I
could with difficulty think any thing impossible to him. I knew not how
to set up my own opinions of material causes and the powers of the human
mind, as the limits of existence. Mr. Falkland had always been to my
imagination an object of wonder, and that which excites our wonder we
scarcely suppose ourselves competent to analyse.

It may well be conceived, that one of the first persons to whom I
thought of applying for an explanation of this dreadful mystery was the
accomplished Laura. My disappointment here cut me to the heart. I was
not prepared for it. I recollected the ingenuousness of her nature, the
frankness of her manners, the partiality with which she had honoured me.
If I were mortified with the coldness, the ruggedness, and the cruel
mistake of principles with which the village inhabitants repelled my
enquiries, the mortification I suffered, only drove me more impetuously
to seek the cure of my griefs from this object of my admiration. "In
Laura," said I, "I am secure from these vulgar prejudices. I confide in
her justice. I am sure she will not cast me off unheard, nor without
strictly examining a question on all sides, in which every thing that is
valuable to a person she once esteemed, may be involved."

Thus encouraging myself, I turned my steps to the place of her
residence. As I passed along I called up all my recollection, I summoned
my faculties. "I may be made miserable," said I, "but it shall not be
for want of any exertion of mine, that promises to lead to happiness. I
will be clear, collected, simple in narrative, ingenuous in
communication. I will leave nothing unsaid that the case may require. I
will not volunteer any thing that relates to my former transactions with
Mr. Falkland; but, if I find that my present calamity is connected with
those transactions, I will not fear but that by an honest explanation I
shall remove it."

I knocked at the door. A servant appeared, and told me that her mistress
hoped I would excuse her; she must really beg to dispense with my visit.

I was thunderstruck. I was rooted to the spot. I had been carefully
preparing my mind for every thing that I supposed likely to happen, but
this event had not entered into my calculations. I roused myself in a
partial degree, and walked away without uttering a word.

I had not gone far before I perceived one of the workmen following me,
who put into my hands a billet. The contents were these:--

"MR. WILLIAMS,

"Let me see you no more. I have a right at least to expect your
compliance with this requisition; and, upon that condition, I pardon the
enormous impropriety and guilt with which you have conducted yourself to
me and my family.

"LAURA DENISON."

The sensations with which I read these few lines are indescribable. I
found in them a dreadful confirmation of the calamity that on all sides
invaded me. But what I felt most was the unmoved coldness with which
they appeared to be written. This coldness from Laura, my comforter, my
friend, my mother! To dismiss, to cast me off for ever, without one
thought of compunction!

I determined however, in spite of her requisition, and in spite of her
coldness, to have an explanation with her. I did not despair of
conquering the antipathy she harboured. I did not fear that I should
rouse her from the vulgar and unworthy conception, of condemning a man,
in points the most material to his happiness, without stating the
accusations that are urged against him, and without hearing him in
reply.

Though I had no doubt, by means of resolution, of gaining access to her
in her house, yet I preferred taking her unprepared, and not warmed
against me by any previous contention. Accordingly, the next morning, at
the time she usually devoted to half an hour's air and exercise, I
hastened to her garden, leaped the paling, and concealed myself in an
arbour. Presently I saw, from my retreat, the younger part of the family
strolling through the garden, and from thence into the fields; but it
was not my business to be seen by them. I looked after them however with
earnestness, unobserved; and I could not help asking myself, with a
deep and heartfelt sigh, whether it were possible that I saw them now
for the last time?

They had not advanced far into the fields, before their mother made her
appearance. I observed in her her usual serenity and sweetness of
countenance. I could feel my heart knocking against my ribs. My whole
frame was in a tumult. I stole out of the arbour; and, as I advanced
nearer, my pace became quickened.

"For God's sake, madam," exclaimed I, "give me a hearing! Do not avoid
me!"

She stood still. "No, sir," she replied, "I shall not avoid you. I
wished you to dispense with this meeting; but since I cannot obtain
that--I am conscious of no wrong; and therefore, though the meeting
gives me pain, it inspires me with no fear."

"Oh, madam," answered I, "my friend! the object of all my reverence!
whom I once ventured to call my mother! can you wish not to hear me? Can
you have no anxiety for my justification, whatever may be the
unfavourable impression you may have received against me?"

"Not an atom. I have neither wish nor inclination to hear you. That tale
which, in its plain and unadorned state, is destructive of the character
of him to whom it relates, no colouring can make an honest one."

"Good God! Can you think of condemning a man when you have heard only
one side of his story?"

"Indeed I can," replied she with dignity. "The maxim of hearing both
sides may be very well in some cases; but it would be ridiculous to
suppose that there are not cases, that, at the first mention, are too
clear to admit the shadow of a doubt. By a well-concerted defence you
may give me new reasons to admire your abilities; but I am acquainted
with them already. I can admire your abilities, without tolerating your
character."

"Madam! Amiable, exemplary Laura! whom, in the midst of all your
harshness and inflexibility, I honour! I conjure you, by every thing
that is sacred, to tell me what it is that has filled you with this
sudden aversion to me."

"No, sir; that you shall never obtain from me. I have nothing to say to
you. I stand still and hear you; because virtue disdains to appear
abashed and confounded in the presence of vice. Your conduct even at
this moment, in my opinion, condemns you. True virtue refuses the
drudgery of explanation and apology. True virtue shines by its own
light, and needs no art to set it off. You have the first principles of
morality as yet to learn."

"And can you imagine, that the most upright conduct is always superior
to the danger of ambiguity?"

"Exactly so. Virtue, sir, consists in actions, and not in words. The
good man and the bad are characters precisely opposite, not characters
distinguished from each other by imperceptible shades. The Providence
that rules us all, has not permitted us to be left without a clew in the
most important of all questions. Eloquence may seek to confound it; but
it shall be my care to avoid its deceptive influence. I do not wish to
have my understanding perverted, and all the differences of things
concealed from my apprehension."

"Madam, madam! it would be impossible for you to hold this language, if
you had not always lived in this obscure retreat, if you had ever been
conversant with the passions and institutions of men."

"It may be so. And, if that be the case, I have great reason to be
thankful to my God, who has thus enabled me to preserve the innocence of
my heart, and the integrity of my understanding."

"Can you believe then that ignorance is the only, or the safest,
preservative of integrity?"

"Sir, I told you at first, and I repeat to you again, that all your
declamation is in vain. I wish you would have saved me and yourself that
pain which is the only thing that can possibly result from it. But let
us suppose that virtue could ever be the equivocal thing you would have
me believe. Is it possible, if you had been honest, that you would not
have acquainted me with your story? Is it possible, that you would have
left me to have been informed of it by a mere accident, and with all the
shocking aggravations you well knew that accident would give it? Is it
possible you should have violated the most sacred of all trusts, and
have led me unknowingly to admit to the intercourse of my children a
character, which if, as you pretend, it is substantially honest, you
cannot deny to be blasted and branded in the face of the whole world?
Go, sir; I despise you. You are a monster and not a man. I cannot tell
whether my personal situation misleads me; but, to my thinking, this
last action of yours is worse than all the rest. Nature has constituted
me the protector of my children. I shall always remember and resent the
indelible injury you have done them. You have wounded me to the very
heart, and have taught me to what a pitch the villainy of man can
extend."

"Madam, I can be silent no longer. I see that you have by some means
come to a hearing of the story of Mr. Falkland."

"I have. I am astonished you have the effrontery to pronounce his name.
That name has been a denomination, as far back as my memory can reach,
for the most exalted of mortals, the wisest and most generous of men."

"Madam, I owe it to myself to set you right on this subject. Mr.
Falkland--"

"Mr. Williams, I see my children returning from the fields, and coming
this way. The basest action you ever did was the obtruding yourself upon
them as an instructor. I insist that you see them no more. I command you
to be silent. I command you to withdraw. If you persist in your absurd
resolution of expostulating with me, you must take some other time."

I could continue no longer. I was in a manner heart-broken through the
whole of this dialogue. I could not think of protracting the pain of
this admirable woman, upon whom, though I was innocent of the crimes she
imputed to me, I had inflicted so much pain already. I yielded to the
imperiousness of her commands, and withdrew.

I hastened, without knowing why, from the presence of Laura to my own
habitation. Upon entering the house, an apartment of which I occupied, I
found it totally deserted of its usual inhabitants. The woman and her
children were gone to enjoy the freshness of the breeze. The husband was
engaged in his usual out-door occupations. The doors of persons of the
lower order in this part of the country are secured, in the day-time,
only with a latch. I entered, and went into the kitchen of the family.
Here, as I looked round, my eyes accidentally glanced upon a paper lying
in one corner, which, by some association I was unable to explain,
roused in me a strong sensation of suspicion and curiosity. I eagerly
went towards it, caught it up, and found it to be the very paper of the
WONDERFUL AND SURPRISING HISTORY OF CALEB WILLIAMS, the discovery of
which, towards the close of my residence in London, had produced in me
such inexpressible anguish.

This encounter at once cleared up all the mystery that hung upon my late
transactions. Abhorred and intolerable certainty succeeded to the doubts
which had haunted my mind. It struck me with the rapidity of lightning.
I felt a sudden torpor and sickness that pervaded every fibre of my
frame.

Was there no hope that remained for me? Was acquittal useless? Was there
no period, past or in prospect, that could give relief to my sufferings?
Was the odious and atrocious falsehood that had been invented against
me, to follow me wherever I went, to strip me of character, to deprive
me of the sympathy and good-will of mankind, to wrest from me the very
bread by which life must be sustained?

For the space perhaps of half an hour the agony I felt from this
termination to my tranquillity, and the expectation it excited of the
enmity which would follow me through every retreat, was such as to
bereave me of all consistent thinking, much more of the power of coming
to any resolution. As soon as this giddiness and horror of the mind
subsided, and the deadly calm that invaded my faculties was no more, one
stiff and master gale gained the ascendancy, and drove me to an instant
desertion of this late cherished retreat. I had no patience to enter
into further remonstrance and explanation with the inhabitants of my
present residence. I believed that it was in vain to hope to recover the
favourable prepossession and tranquillity I had lately enjoyed. In
encountering the prejudices that were thus armed against me, I should
have to deal with a variety of dispositions, and, though I might succeed
with some, I could not expect to succeed with all. I had seen too much
of the reign of triumphant falsehood, to have that sanguine confidence
in the effects of my innocence, which would have suggested itself to the
mind of any other person of my propensities and my age. The recent
instance which had occurred in my conversation with Laura might well
contribute to discourage me. I could not endure the thought of opposing
the venom that was thus scattered against me, in detail and through its
minuter particles. If ever it should be necessary to encounter it, if I
were pursued like a wild beast, till I could no longer avoid turning
upon my hunters, I would then turn upon the true author of this
unprincipled attack; I would encounter the calumny in its strong hold; I
would rouse myself to an exertion hitherto unessayed; and, by the
firmness, intrepidity, and unalterable constancy I should display, would
yet compel mankind to believe Mr. Falkland a suborner and a murderer!




CHAPTER XIV.


I hasten to the conclusion of my melancholy story. I began to write soon
after the period to which I have now conducted it. This was another
resource that my mind, ever eager in inventing means to escape from my
misery, suggested. In my haste to withdraw myself from the retreat in
Wales, where first the certainty of Mr. Falkland's menaces was confirmed
to me, I left behind me the apparatus of my etymological enquiries, and
the papers I had written upon the subject. I have never been able to
persuade myself to resume this pursuit. It is always discouraging, to
begin over again a laborious task, and exert one's self to recover a
position we had already occupied. I knew not how soon or how abruptly I
might be driven from any new situation; the appendages of the study in
which I had engaged were too cumbrous for this state of dependence and
uncertainty; they only served to give new sharpness to the enmity of my
foe, and new poignancy to my hourly-renewing distress.

But what was of greatest importance, and made the deepest impression
upon my mind, was my separation from the family of Laura. Fool that I
was, to imagine that there was any room for me in the abodes of
friendship and tranquillity! It was now first, that I felt, with the
most intolerable acuteness, how completely I was cut off from the whole
human species. Other connections I had gained, comparatively without
interest; and I saw them dissolved without the consummation of agony. I
had never experienced the purest refinements of friendship, but in two
instances, that of Collins, and this of the family of Laura. Solitude,
separation, banishment! These are words often in the mouths of human
beings; but few men except myself have felt the full latitude of their
meaning. The pride of philosophy has taught us to treat man as an
individual. He is no such thing. He holds necessarily, indispensably, to
his species. He is like those twin-births, that have two heads indeed,
and four hands; but, if you attempt to detach them from each other, they
are inevitably subjected to miserable and lingering destruction.

It was this circumstance, more than all the rest, that gradually gorged
my heart with abhorrence of Mr. Falkland. I could not think of his name
but with a sickness and a loathing that seemed more than human. It was
by his means that I suffered the loss of one consolation after another,
of every thing that was happiness, or that had the resemblance of
happiness.

The writing of these memoirs served me as a source of avocation for
several years. For some time I had a melancholy satisfaction in it. I
was better pleased to retrace the particulars of calamities that had
formerly afflicted me, than to look forward, as at other times I was too
apt to do, to those by which I might hereafter be overtaken. I conceived
that my story, faithfully digested, would carry in it an impression of
truth that few men would be able to resist; or, at worst, that, by
leaving it behind me when I should no longer continue to exist,
posterity might be induced to do me justice; and, seeing in my example
what sort of evils are entailed upon mankind by society as it is at
present constituted, might be inclined to turn their attention upon the
fountain from which such bitter waters have been accustomed to flow. But
these motives have diminished in their influence. I have contracted a
disgust for life and all its appendages. Writing, which was at first a
pleasure, is changed into a burthen. I shall compress into a small
compass what remains to be told.

I discovered, not long after the period of which I am speaking, the
precise cause of the reverse I had experienced in my residence in Wales,
and, included in that cause, what it was I had to look for in my future
adventures. Mr. Falkland had taken the infernal Gines into his pay, a
man critically qualified for the service in which he was now engaged, by
the unfeeling brutality of his temper, by his habits of mind at once
audacious and artful, and by the peculiar animosity and vengeance he had
conceived against me. The employment to which this man was hired, was
that of following me from place to place, blasting my reputation, and
preventing me from the chance, by continuing long in one residence, of
acquiring a character for integrity, that should give new weight to any
accusation I might at a future time be induced to prefer. He had come to
the seat of my residence with the bricklayers and labourers I have
mentioned; and, while he took care to keep out of sight so far as
related to me, was industrious in disseminating that which, in the eye
of the world, seemed to amount to a demonstration of the profligacy and
detestableness of my character. It was no doubt from him that the
detested scroll had been procured, which I had found in my habitation
immediately prior to my quitting it. In all this Mr. Falkland, reasoning
upon his principles, was only employing a necessary precaution. There
was something in the temper of his mind, that impressed him with
aversion to the idea of violently putting an end to my existence; at the
same time that unfortunately he could never deem himself sufficiently
secured against my recrimination, so long as I remained alive. As to the
fact of Gines being retained by him for this tremendous purpose, he by
no means desired that it should become generally known; but neither did
he look upon the possibility of its being known with terror. It was
already too notorious for his wishes, that I had advanced the most
odious charges against him. If he regarded me with abhorrence as the
adversary of his fame, those persons who had had occasion to be in any
degree acquainted with our history, did not entertain less abhorrence
against me for my own sake. If they should at any time know the pains he
exerted in causing my evil reputation to follow me, they would consider
it as an act of impartial justice, perhaps as a generous anxiety to
prevent other men from being imposed upon and injured, as he had been.

What expedient was I to employ for the purpose of counteracting the
meditated and barbarous prudence, which was thus destined, in all
changes of scene, to deprive me of the benefits and consolations of
human society? There was one expedient against which I was absolutely
determined--disguise. I had experienced so many mortifications, and such
intolerable restraint, when I formerly had recourse to it; it was
associated in my memory with sensations of such acute anguish, that my
mind was thus far entirely convinced: life was not worth purchasing at
so high a price! But, though in this respect I was wholly resolved,
there was another point that did not appear so material, and in which
therefore I was willing to accommodate myself to circumstances. I was
contented, if that would insure my peace, to submit to the otherwise
unmanly expedient of passing by a different name.

But the change of my name, the abruptness with which I removed from
place to place, the remoteness and the obscurity which I proposed to
myself in the choice of my abode, were all insufficient to elude the
sagacity of Gines, or the unrelenting constancy with which Mr. Falkland
incited my tormentor to pursue me. Whithersoever I removed myself it was
not long before I had occasion to perceive this detested adversary in my
rear. No words can enable me to do justice to the sensations which this
circumstance produced in me. It was like what has been described of the
eye of Omniscience, pursuing the guilty sinner, and darting a ray that
awakens him to new sensibility, at the very moment that, otherwise,
exhausted nature would lull him into a temporary oblivion of the
reproaches of his conscience. Sleep fled from my eyes. No walls could
hide me from the discernment of this hated foe. Every where his industry
was unwearied to create for me new distress. Rest I had none; relief I
had none: never could I count upon an instant's security; never could I
wrap myself in the shroud of oblivion. The minutes in which I did not
actually perceive him, were contaminated and blasted with the certain
expectation of his speedy interference. In my first retreat I had passed
a few weeks of delusive tranquillity, but never after was I happy enough
to attain to so much as that shadowy gratification. I spent some years
in this dreadful vicissitude of pain. My sensations at certain periods
amounted to insanity.

I pursued in every succeeding instance the conduct I had adopted at
first. I determined never to enter into a contest of accusation and
defence with the execrable Gines. If I could have submitted to it in
other respects, what purpose would it answer? I should have but an
imperfect and mutilated story to tell. This story had succeeded with
persons already prepossessed in my favour by personal intercourse; but
could it succeed with strangers? It had succeeded so long as I was able
to hide myself from my pursuers; but could it succeed now, that this
appeared impracticable, and that they proceeded by arming against me a
whole vicinity at once?

It is inconceivable the mischiefs that this kind of existence included.
Why should I insist upon such aggravations as hunger, beggary, and
external wretchedness? These were an inevitable consequence. It was by
the desertion of mankind that, in each successive instance, I was made
acquainted with my fate. Delay in such a moment served but to increase
the evil; and when I fled, meagreness and penury were the ordinary
attendants of my course. But this was a small consideration. Indignation
at one time, and unconquerable perseverance at another, sustained me,
where humanity, left to itself, would probably have sunk.

It has already appeared that I was not of a temper to endure calamity,
without endeavouring, by every means I could devise, to elude and disarm
it. Recollecting, as I was habituated to do, the various projects by
which my situation could be meliorated, the question occurred to me,
"Why should I be harassed by the pursuits of this Gines? Why, man to
man, may I not, by the powers of my mind, attain the ascendancy over
him? At present he appears to be the persecutor, and I the persecuted:
is not this difference the mere creature of the imagination? May I not
employ my ingenuity to vex him with difficulties, and laugh at the
endless labour to which he will be condemned?"

Alas, this is a speculation for a mind at ease! It is not the
persecution, but the catastrophe which is annexed to it, that makes the
difference between the tyrant and the sufferer! In mere corporal
exertion the hunter perhaps is upon a level with the miserable animal he
pursues! But could it be forgotten by either of us, that at every stage
Gines was to gratify his malignant passions, by disseminating charges of
the most infamous nature, and exciting against me the abhorrence of
every honest bosom, while I was to sustain the still-repeated
annihilation of my peace, my character, and my bread? Could I, by any
refinement of reason, convert this dreadful series into sport? I had no
philosophy that qualified me for so extraordinary an effort. If, under
other circumstances, I could even have entertained so strange an
imagination, I was restrained in the present instance by the necessity
of providing for myself the means of subsistence, and the fetters which,
through that necessity, the forms of human society imposed upon my
exertions.

In one of those changes of residence, to which my miserable fate
repeatedly compelled me, I met, upon a road which I was obliged to
traverse, the friend of my youth, my earliest and best beloved friend,
the venerable Collins. It was one of those misfortunes which served to
accumulate my distress, that this man had quitted the island of Great
Britain only a very few weeks before that fatal reverse of fortune which
had ever since pursued me with unrelenting eagerness. Mr. Falkland, in
addition to the large estate he possessed in England, had a very
valuable plantation in the West Indies. This property had been greatly
mismanaged by the person who had the direction of it on the spot; and,
after various promises and evasions on his part, which, however they
might serve to beguile the patience of Mr. Falkland, had been attended
with no salutary fruits, it was resolved that Mr. Collins should go over
in person, to rectify the abuses which had so long prevailed. There had
even been some idea of his residing several years, if not settling
finally, upon the plantation. From that hour to the present I had never
received the smallest intelligence respecting him.

I had always considered the circumstance of his critical absence as one
of my severest misfortunes. Mr. Collins had been one of the first
persons, even in the period of my infancy, to conceive hopes of me, as
of something above the common standard; and had contributed more than
any other to encourage and assist my juvenile studies. He had been the
executor of the little property of my father, who had fixed upon him for
that purpose in consideration of the mutual affection that existed
between us; and I seemed, on every account, to have more claim upon his
protection than upon that of any other human being. I had always
believed that, had he been present in the crisis of my fortune, he would
have felt a conviction of my innocence; and, convinced himself, would,
by means of the venerableness and energy of his character, have
interposed so effectually, as to have saved me the greater part of my
subsequent misfortunes.

There was yet another idea in my mind relative to this subject, which
had more weight with me, than even the substantial exertions of
friendship I should have expected from him. The greatest aggravation of
my present lot was, that I was cut off from the friendship of mankind. I
can safely affirm, that poverty and hunger, that endless wanderings,
that a blasted character and the curses that clung to my name, were all
of them slight misfortunes compared to this. I endeavoured to sustain
myself by the sense of my integrity, but the voice of no man upon earth
echoed to the voice of my conscience. "I called aloud; but there was
none to answer; there was none that regarded." To me the whole world was
unhearing as the tempest, and as cold as the torpedo. Sympathy, the
magnetic virtue, the hidden essence of our life, was extinct. Nor was
this the sum of my misery. This food, so essential to an intelligent
existence, seemed perpetually renewing before me in its fairest colours,
only the more effectually to elude my grasp, and to mock my hunger. From
time to time I was prompted to unfold the affections of my soul, only to
be repelled with the greater anguish, and to be baffled in a way the
most intolerably mortifying.

No sight therefore could give me a purer delight than that which now
presented itself to my eyes. It was some time however, before either of
us recognised the person of the other. Ten years had elapsed since our
last interview. Mr. Collins looked much older than he had done at that
period; in addition to which, he was, in his present appearance, pale,
sickly, and thin. These unfavourable effects had been produced by the
change of climate, particularly trying to persons in an advanced period
of life. Add to which, I supposed him to be at that moment in the West
Indies. I was probably as much altered in the period that had elapsed as
he had been. I was the first to recollect him. He was on horseback; I on
foot. I had suffered him to pass me. In a moment the full idea of who he
was rushed upon my mind; I ran; I called with an impetuous voice; I was
unable to restrain the vehemence of my emotions.

The ardour of my feelings disguised my usual tone of speaking, which
otherwise Mr. Collins would infallibly have recognised. His sight was
already dim; he pulled up his horse till I should overtake him; and then
said, "Who are you? I do not know you."

"My father!" exclaimed I, embracing one of his knees with fervour and
delight, "I am your son; once your little Caleb, whom you a thousand
times loaded with your kindness!"

The unexpected repetition of my name gave a kind of shuddering emotion
to my friend, which was however checked by his age, and the calm and
benevolent philosophy that formed one of his most conspicuous habits.

"I did not expect to see you!" replied he: "I did not wish it!"

"My best, my oldest friend!" answered I, respect blending itself with my
impatience, "do not say so! I have not a friend any where in the whole
world but you! In you at least let me find sympathy and reciprocal
affection! If you knew how anxiously I have thought of you during the
whole period of your absence, you would not thus grievously disappoint
me in your return!"

"How is it," said Mr. Collins, gravely, "that you have been reduced to
this forlorn condition? Was it not the inevitable consequence of your
own actions?"

"The actions of others, not mine! Does not your heart tell you that I am
innocent?"

"No. My observation of your early character taught me that you would be
extraordinary; but, unhappily, all extraordinary men are not good men:
that seems to be a lottery, dependent on circumstances apparently the
most trivial."

"Will you hear my justification? I am as sure as I am of my existence,
that I can convince you of my purity."

"Certainly, if you require it, I will hear you. But that must not be
just now. I could have been glad to decline it wholly. At my age I am
not fit for the storm; and I am not so sanguine as you in my expectation
of the result. Of what would you convince me? That Mr. Falkland is a
suborner and murderer?"

I made no answer. My silence was an affirmative to the question.

"And what benefit will result from this conviction? I have known you a
promising boy, whose character might turn to one side or the other as
events should decide. I have known Mr. Falkland in his maturer years,
and have always admired him, as the living model of liberality and
goodness. If you could change all my ideas, and show me that there was
no criterion by which vice might be prevented from being mistaken for
virtue, what benefit would arise from that? I must part with all my
interior consolation, and all my external connections. And for what?
What is it you propose? The death of Mr. Falkland by the hands of the
hangman."

"No; I will not hurt a hair of his head, unless compelled to it by a
principle of defence. But surely you owe me justice?"

"What justice? The justice of proclaiming your innocence? You know what
consequences are annexed to that. But I do not believe I shall find you
innocent. If you even succeed in perplexing my understanding, you will
not succeed in enlightening it. Such is the state of mankind, that
innocence, when involved in circumstances of suspicion, can scarcely
ever make out a demonstration of its purity; and guilt can often make us
feel an insurmountable reluctance to the pronouncing it guilt.
Meanwhile, for the purchase of this uncertainty, I must sacrifice all
the remaining comforts of my life. I believe Mr. Falkland to be
virtuous; but I know him to be prejudiced. He would never forgive me
even this accidental parley, if by any means he should come to be
acquainted with it."

"Oh, argue not the consequences that are possible to result!" answered
I, impatiently, "I have a right to your kindness; I have a right to your
assistance!"

"You have them. You have them to a certain degree; and it is not likely
that, by any process of examination, you can have them entire. You know
my habits of thinking. I regard you as vicious; but I do not consider
the vicious as proper objects of indignation and scorn. I consider you
as a machine; you are not constituted, I am afraid, to be greatly useful
to your fellow men: but you did not make yourself; you are just what
circumstances irresistibly compelled you to be. I am sorry for your ill
properties; but I entertain no enmity against you, nothing but
benevolence. Considering you in the light in which I at present consider
you, I am ready to contribute every thing in my power to your real
advantage, and would gladly assist you, if I knew how, in detecting and
extirpating the errors that have misled you. You have disappointed me,
but I have no reproaches to utter: it is more necessary for me to feel
compassion for you, than that I should accumulate your misfortune by my
censures."

What could I say to such a man as this? Amiable, incomparable man! Never
was my mind more painfully divided than at that moment. The more he
excited my admiration, the more imperiously did my heart command me,
whatever were the price it should cost, to extort his friendship. I was
persuaded that severe duty required of him, that he should reject all
personal considerations, that he should proceed resolutely to the
investigation of the truth, and that, if he found the result terminating
in my favour, he should resign all his advantages, and, deserted as I
was by the world, make a common cause, and endeavour to compensate the
general injustice. But was it for me to force this conduct upon him, if,
now in his declining years, his own fortitude shrank from it? Alas,
neither he nor I foresaw the dreadful catastrophe that was so closely
impending! Otherwise, I am well assured that no tenderness for his
remaining tranquillity would have withheld him from a compliance with my
wishes! On the other hand, could I pretend to know what evils might
result to him from his declaring himself my advocate? Might not his
integrity be browbeaten and defeated, as mine had been? Did the
imbecility of his grey hairs afford no advantage to my terrible
adversary in the contest? Might not Mr. Falkland reduce him to a
condition as wretched and low as mine? After all, was it not vice in me
to desire to involve another man in my sufferings? If I regarded them as
intolerable, this was still an additional reason why I should bear them
alone.

Influenced by these considerations, I assented to his views. I assented
to be thought hardly of by the man in the world whose esteem I most
ardently desired, rather than involve him in possible calamity. I
assented to the resigning what appeared to me at that moment as the last
practicable comfort of my life; a comfort, upon the thought of which,
while I surrendered it, my mind dwelt with undescribable longings. Mr.
Collins was deeply affected with the apparent ingenuousness with which I
expressed my feelings. The secret struggle of his mind was, "Can this be
hypocrisy? The individual with whom I am conferring, if virtuous, is one
of the most disinterestedly virtuous persons in the world." We tore
ourselves from each other. Mr. Collins promised, as far as he was able,
to have an eye upon my vicissitudes, and to assist me, in every respect
that was consistent with a just recollection of consequences. Thus I
parted as it were with the last expiring hope of my mind; and
voluntarily consented, thus maimed and forlorn, to encounter all the
evils that were yet in store for me.

This is the latest event which at present I think it necessary to
record. I shall doubtless hereafter have further occasion to take up the
pen. Great and unprecedented as my sufferings have been, I feel
intimately persuaded that there are worse sufferings that await me. What
mysterious cause is it that enables me to write this, and not to perish
under the horrible apprehension!




CHAPTER XV.


It is as I foreboded. The presage with which I was visited was
prophetic. I am now to record a new and terrible revolution of my
fortune and my mind.

Having made experiment of various situations with one uniform result, I
at length determined to remove myself, if possible, from the reach of my
persecutor, by going into voluntary banishment from my native soil. This
was my last resource for tranquillity, for honest fame, for those
privileges to which human life is indebted for the whole of its value.
"In some distant climate," said I, "surely I may find that security
which is necessary to persevering pursuit; surely I may lift my head
erect, associate with men upon the footing of a man, acquire
connections, and preserve them!" It is inconceivable with what ardent
Teachings of the soul I aspired to this termination.

This last consolation was denied me by the inexorable Falkland.

At the time the project was formed I was at no great distance from the
east coast of the island, and I resolved to take ship at Harwich, and
pass immediately into Holland. I accordingly repaired to that place, and
went, almost as soon as I arrived, to the port. But there was no vessel
perfectly ready to sail. I left the port, and withdrew to an inn, where,
after some time, I retired to a chamber. I was scarcely there before the
door of the room was opened, and the man whose countenance was the most
hateful to my eyes, Gines, entered the apartment. He shut the door as
soon as he entered.

"Youngster," said he, "I have a little private intelligence to
communicate to you. I come as a friend, and that I may save you a
labour-in-vain trouble. If you consider what I have to say in that
light, it will be the better for you. It is my business now, do you see,
for want of a better, to see that you do not break out of bounds. Not
that I much matter having one man for my employer, or dancing attendance
after another's heels; but I have special kindness for you, for some
good turns that you wot of, and therefore I do not stand upon
ceremonies! You have led me a very pretty round already; and, out of the
love I bear you, you shall lead me as much further, if you will. But
beware the salt seas! They are out of my orders. You are a prisoner at
present, and I believe all your life will remain so. Thanks to the
milk-and-water softness of your former master! If I had the ordering of
these things, it should go with you in another fashion. As long as you
think proper, you are a prisoner within the rules; and the rules with
which the soft-hearted squire indulges you, are all England, Scotland,
and Wales. But you are not to go out of these climates. The squire is
determined you shall never pass the reach of his disposal. He has
therefore given orders that, whenever you attempt so to do, you shall be
converted from a prisoner at large to a prisoner in good earnest. A
friend of mine followed you just now to the harbour; I was within call;
and, if there had been any appearance of your setting your foot from
land, we should have been with you in a trice, and laid you fast by the
heels. I would advise you, for the future, to keep at a proper distance
from the sea, for fear of the worst. You see I tell you all this for
your good. For my part, I should be better satisfied if you were in
limbo, with a rope about your neck, and a comfortable bird's eye
prospect to the gallows: but I do as I am directed; and so good night to
you!"

The intelligence thus conveyed to me occasioned an instantaneous
revolution in both my intellectual and animal system. I disdained to
answer, or take the smallest notice of the fiend by whom it was
delivered. It is now three days since I received it, and from that
moment to the present my blood has been in a perpetual ferment. My
thoughts wander from one idea of horror to another, with incredible
rapidity. I have had no sleep. I have scarcely remained in one posture
for a minute together. It has been with the utmost difficulty that I
have been able to command myself far enough to add a few pages to my
story. But, uncertain as I am of the events of each succeeding hour, I
determined to force myself to the performance of this task. All is not
right within me. How it will terminate, God knows. I sometimes fear that
I shall be wholly deserted of my reason.

What--dark, mysterious, unfeeling, unrelenting tyrant!--is it come to
this? When Nero and Caligula swayed the Roman sceptre, it was a fearful
thing to offend these bloody rulers. The empire had already spread
itself from climate to climate, and from sea to sea. If their unhappy
victim fled to the rising of the sun, where the luminary of day seems to
us first to ascend from the waves of the ocean, the power of the tyrant
was still behind him. If he withdrew to the west, to Hesperian darkness,
and the shores of barbarian Thule, still he was not safe from his
gore-drenched foe.--Falkland! art thou the offspring, in whom the
lineaments of these tyrants are faithfully preserved? Was the world,
with all its climates, made in vain for thy helpless unoffending victim?

Tremble!

Tyrants have trembled, surrounded with whole armies of their
Janissaries! What should make thee inaccessible to my fury? No, I will
use no daggers! I will unfold a tale!--I will show thee to the world for
what thou art; and all the men that live, shall confess my truth!--Didst
thou imagine that I was altogether passive, a mere worm, organised to
feel sensations of pain, but no emotion of resentment? Didst thou
imagine that there was no danger in inflicting on me pains however
great, miseries however dreadful? Didst thou believe me impotent,
imbecile, and idiot-like, with no understanding to contrive thy ruin,
and no energy to perpetrate it?

I will tell a tale--! The justice of the country shall hear me! The
elements of nature in universal uproar shall not interrupt me! I will
speak with a voice more fearful than thunder!--Why should I be supposed
to speak from any dishonourable motive? I am under no prosecution now! I
shall not now appear to be endeavouring to remove a criminal indictment
from myself, by throwing it back on its author!--Shall I regret the ruin
that will overwhelm thee? Too long have I been tender-hearted and
forbearing! What benefit has ever resulted from my mistaken clemency?
There is no evil thou hast scrupled to accumulate upon me! Neither will
I be more scrupulous! Thou hast shown no mercy; and thou shalt receive
none!--I must be calm! bold as a lion, yet collected!

This is a moment pregnant with fate. I know--I think I know--that I will
be triumphant, and crush my seemingly omnipotent foe. But, should it be
otherwise, at least he shall not be every way successful. His fame shall
not be immortal as he thinks. These papers shall preserve the truth;
they shall one day be published, and then the world shall do justice on
us both. Recollecting that, I shall not die wholly without consolation.
It is not to be endured that falsehood and tyranny should reign for
ever.

How impotent are the precautions of man against the eternally existing
laws of the intellectual world! This Falkland has invented against me
every species of foul accusation. He has hunted me from city to city.
He has drawn his lines of circumvallation round me that I may not
escape. He has kept his scenters of human prey for ever at my heels. He
may hunt me out of the world.--In vain! With this engine, this little
pen, I defeat all his machinations; I stab him in the very point he was
most solicitous to defend!

Collins! I now address myself to you. I have consented that you should
yield me no assistance in my present terrible situation. I am content to
die rather than do any thing injurious to your tranquillity. But
remember, you are my father still! I conjure you, by all the love you
ever bore me, by the benefits you have conferred on me, by the
forbearance and kindness towards you that now penetrates my soul, by my
innocence--for, if these be the last words I shall ever write, I die
protesting my innocence!--by all these, or whatever tie more sacred has
influence on your soul, I conjure you, listen to my last request!
Preserve these papers from destruction, and preserve them from Falkland!
It is all I ask! I have taken care to provide a safe mode of conveying
them into your possession: and I have a firm confidence, which I will
not suffer to depart from me, that they will one day find their way to
the public!

The pen lingers in my trembling fingers! Is there any thing I have left
unsaid?--The contents of the fatal trunk, from which all my misfortunes
originated, I have never been able to ascertain. I once thought it
contained some murderous instrument or relic connected with the fate of
the unhappy Tyrrel. I am now persuaded that the secret it encloses, is a
faithful narrative of that and its concomitant transactions, written by
Mr. Falkland, and reserved in case of the worst, that, if by any
unforeseen event his guilt should come to be fully disclosed, it might
contribute to redeem the wreck of his reputation. But the truth or the
falsehood of this conjecture is of little moment. If Falkland shall
never be detected to the satisfaction of the world, such a narrative
will probably never see the light. In that case this story of mine may
amply, severely perhaps, supply its place.

I know not what it is that renders me thus solemn. I have a secret
foreboding, as if I should never again be master of myself. If I succeed
in what I now meditate respecting Falkland, my precaution in the
disposal of these papers will have been unnecessary; I shall no longer
be reduced to artifice and evasion. If I fail, the precaution will
appear to have been wisely chosen.

       *       *       *       *       *




POSTSCRIPT.


All is over. I have carried into execution my meditated attempt. My
situation is totally changed; I now sit down to give an account of it.
For several weeks after the completion of this dreadful business, my
mind was in too tumultuous a state to permit me to write. I think I
shall now be able to arrange my thoughts sufficiently for that purpose.
Great God! how wondrous, how terrible are the events that have
intervened since I was last employed in a similar manner! It is no
wonder that my thoughts were solemn, and my mind filled with horrible
forebodings!

Having formed my resolution, I set out from Harwich, for the
metropolitan town of the county in which Mr. Falkland resided. Gines, I
well knew, was in my rear. That was of no consequence to me. He might
wonder at the direction I pursued, but he could not tell with what
purpose I pursued it. My design was a secret, carefully locked up in my
own breast. It was not without a sentiment of terror that I entered a
town which had been the scene of my long imprisonment. I proceeded to
the house of the chief magistrate the instant I arrived, that I might
give no time to my adversary to counterwork my proceeding.

I told him who I was, and that I was come from a distant part of the
kingdom, for the purpose of rendering him the medium of a charge of
murder against my former patron. My name was already familiar to him. He
answered, that he could not take cognizance of my deposition; that I was
an object of universal execration in that part of the world; and he was
determined upon no account to be the vehicle of my depravity.

I warned him to consider well what he was doing. I called upon him for
no favour; I only applied to him in the regular exercise of his
function. Would he take upon him to say that he had a right, at his
pleasure, to suppress a charge of this complicated nature? I had to
accuse Mr. Falkland of repeated murders. The perpetrator knew that I was
in possession of the truth upon the subject; and, knowing that, I went
perpetually in danger of my life from his malice and revenge. I was
resolved to go through with the business, if justice were to be obtained
from any court in England. Upon what pretence did he refuse my
deposition? I was in every respect a competent witness. I was of age to
understand the nature of an oath; I was in my perfect senses; I was
untarnished by the verdict of any jury, or the sentence of any judge.
His private opinion of my character could not alter the law of the land.
I demanded to be confronted with Mr. Falkland, and I was well assured I
should substantiate the charge to the satisfaction of the whole world.
If he did not think proper to apprehend him upon my single testimony, I
should be satisfied if he only sent him notice of the charge, and
summoned him to appear.

The magistrate, finding me thus resolute, thought proper a little to
lower his tone. He no longer absolutely refused to comply with my
requisition, but condescended to expostulate with me. He represented to
me Mr. Falkland's health, which had for some years been exceedingly
indifferent; his having been once already brought to the most solemn
examination upon this charge; the diabolical malice in which alone my
proceeding must have originated; and the ten-fold ruin it would bring
down upon my head. To all these representations my answer was short. "I
was determined to go on, and would abide the consequences." A summons
was at length granted, and notice sent to Mr. Falkland of the charge
preferred against him.

Three days elapsed before any further step could be taken in this
business. This interval in no degree contributed to tranquillise my
mind. The thought of preferring a capital accusation against, and
hastening the death of, such a man as Mr. Falkland, was by no means an
opiate to reflection. At one time I commended the action, either as just
revenge (for the benevolence of my nature was in a great degree turned
to gall), or as necessary self-defence, or as that which, in an
impartial and philanthropical estimate, included the smallest evil. At
another time I was haunted with doubts. But, in spite of these
variations of sentiment, I uniformly determined to persist! I felt as if
impelled by a tide of unconquerable impulse. The consequences were such
as might well appal the stoutest heart. Either the ignominious execution
of a man whom I had once so deeply venerated, and whom now I sometimes
suspected not to be without his claims to veneration; or a confirmation,
perhaps an increase, of the calamities I had so long endured. Yet these
I preferred to a state of uncertainty. I desired to know the worst; to
put an end to the hope, however faint, which had been so long my
torment; and, above all, to exhaust and finish the catalogue of
expedients that were at my disposition. My mind was worked up to a state
little short of frenzy. My body was in a burning fever with the
agitation of my thoughts. When I laid my hand upon my bosom or my head,
it seemed to scorch them with the fervency of its heat. I could not sit
still for a moment. I panted with incessant desire that the dreadful
crisis I had so eagerly invoked, were come, and were over.

After an interval of three days, I met Mr. Falkland in the presence of
the magistrate to whom I had applied upon the subject. I had only two
hours' notice to prepare myself; Mr. Falkland seeming as eager as I to
have the question brought to a crisis, and laid at rest for ever. I had
an opportunity, before the examination, to learn that Mr. Forester was
drawn by some business on an excursion on the continent; and that
Collins, whose health when I saw him was in a very precarious state, was
at this time confined with an alarming illness. His constitution had
been wholly broken by his West Indian expedition. The audience I met at
the house of the magistrate consisted of several gentlemen and others
selected for the purpose; the plan being, in some respects, as in the
former instance, to find a medium between the suspicious air of a
private examination, and the indelicacy, as it was styled, of an
examination exposed to the remark of every casual spectator.

I can conceive of no shock greater than that I received from the sight
of Mr. Falkland. His appearance on the last occasion on which we met
had been haggard, ghost-like, and wild, energy in his gestures, and
frenzy in his aspect. It was now the appearance of a corpse. He was
brought in in a chair, unable to stand, fatigued and almost destroyed by
the journey he had just taken. His visage was colourless; his limbs
destitute of motion, almost of life. His head reclined upon his bosom,
except that now and then he lifted it up, and opened his eyes with a
languid glance; immediately after which he sunk back into his former
apparent insensibility. He seemed not to have three hours to live. He
had kept his chamber for several weeks; but the summons of the
magistrate had been delivered to him at his bed-side, his orders
respecting letters and written papers being so peremptory that no one
dared to disobey them. Upon reading the paper he was seized with a very
dangerous fit; but, as soon as he recovered, he insisted upon being
conveyed, with all practicable expedition, to the place of appointment.
Falkland, in the most helpless state, was still Falkland, firm in
command, and capable to extort obedience from every one that approached
him.

What a sight was this to me! Till the moment that Falkland was presented
to my view, my breast was steeled to pity. I thought that I had coolly
entered into the reason of the case (passion, in a state of solemn and
omnipotent vehemence, always appears to be coolness to him in whom it
domineers), and that I had determined impartially and justly. I believed
that, if Mr. Falkland were permitted to persist in his schemes, we must
both of us be completely wretched. I believed that it was in my power,
by the resolution I had formed, to throw my share of this wretchedness
from me, and that his could scarcely be increased. It appeared therefore
to my mind, to be a mere piece of equity and justice, such as an
impartial spectator would desire, that one person should be miserable in
preference to two; that one person rather than two should be
incapacitated from acting his part, and contributing his share to the
general welfare. I thought that in this business I had risen superior to
personal considerations, and judged with a total neglect of the
suggestions of self-regard. It is true, Mr. Falkland was mortal, but,
notwithstanding his apparent decay, he might live long. Ought I to
submit to waste the best years of my life in my present wretched
situation? He had declared that his reputation should be for ever
inviolate; this was his ruling passion, the thought that worked his soul
to madness. He would probably therefore leave a legacy of persecution to
be received by me from the hands of Gines, or some other villain equally
atrocious, when he should himself be no more. Now or never was the time
for me to redeem my future life from endless woe.

But all these fine-spun reasonings vanished before the object that was
now presented to me. "Shall I trample upon a man thus dreadfully
reduced? Shall I point my animosity against one, whom the system of
nature has brought down to the grave? Shall I poison, with sounds the
most intolerable to his ears, the last moments of a man like Falkland?
It is impossible. There must have been some dreadful mistake in the
train of argument that persuaded me to be the author of this hateful
scene. There must have been a better and more magnanimous remedy to the
evils under which I groaned."

It was too late: the mistake I had committed was now gone past all power
of recall. Here was Falkland, solemnly brought before a magistrate to
answer to a charge of murder. Here I stood, having already declared
myself the author of the charge, gravely and sacredly pledged to support
it. This was my situation; and, thus situated, I was called upon
immediately to act. My whole frame shook. I would eagerly have consented
that that moment should have been the last of my existence. I however
believed, that the conduct now most indispensably incumbent on me was to
lay the emotions of my soul naked before my hearers. I looked first at
Mr. Falkland, and then at the magistrate and attendants, and then at Mr.
Falkland again. My voice was suffocated with agony. I began:--

"Why cannot I recall the last four days of my life? How was it possible
for me to be so eager, so obstinate, in a purpose so diabolical? Oh,
that I had listened to the expostulations of the magistrate that hears
me, or submitted to the well-meant despotism of his authority! Hitherto
I have been only miserable; henceforth I shall account myself base!
Hitherto, though hardly treated by mankind, I stood acquitted at the bar
of my own conscience. I had not filled up the measure of my
wretchedness!

"Would to God it were possible for me to retire from this scene without
uttering another word! I would brave the consequences--I would submit to
any imputation of cowardice, falsehood, and profligacy, rather than add
to the weight of misfortune with which Mr. Falkland is overwhelmed. But
the situation, and the demands of Mr. Falkland himself, forbid me. He,
in compassion for whose fallen state I would willingly forget every
interest of my own, would compel me to accuse, that he might enter upon
his justification. I will confess every sentiment of my heart.

"No penitence, no anguish, can expiate the folly and the cruelty of this
last act I have perpetrated. But Mr. Falkland well knows--I affirm it in
his presence--how unwillingly I have proceeded to this extremity. I
have reverenced him; he was worthy of reverence: I have loved him; he
was endowed with qualities that partook of divine.

"From the first moment I saw him, I conceived the most ardent
admiration. He condescended to encourage me; I attached myself to him
with the fulness of my affection. He was unhappy; I exerted myself with
youthful curiosity to discover the secret of his woe. This was the
beginning of misfortune.

"What shall I say?--He was indeed the murderer of Tyrrel; he suffered
the Hawkinses to be executed, knowing that they were innocent, and that
he alone was guilty. After successive surmises, after various
indiscretions on my part, and indications on his, he at length confided
to me at full the fatal tale!

"Mr. Falkland! I most solemnly conjure you to recollect yourself! Did I
ever prove myself unworthy of your confidence? The secret was a most
painful burthen to me; it was the extremest folly that led me
unthinkingly to gain possession of it; but I would have died a thousand
deaths rather than betray it. It was the jealousy of your own thoughts,
and the weight that hung upon your mind, that led you to watch my
motions, and to conceive alarm from every particle of my conduct.

"You began in confidence; why did you not continue in confidence? The
evil that resulted from my original imprudence would then have been
comparatively little. You threatened me: did I then betray you? A word
from my lips at that time would have freed me from your threats for
ever. I bore them for a considerable period, and at last quitted your
service, and threw myself a fugitive upon the world, in silence. Why did
you not suffer me to depart? You brought me back by stratagem and
violence, and wantonly accused me of an enormous felony! Did I then
mention a syllable of the murder, the secret of which was in my
possession?

"Where is the man that has suffered more from the injustice of society
than I have done? I was accused of a villainy that my heart abhorred. I
was sent to jail. I will not enumerate the horrors of my prison, the
lightest of which would make the heart of humanity shudder. I looked
forward to the gallows! Young, ambitious, fond of life, innocent as the
child unborn, I looked forward to the gallows! I believed that one word
of resolute accusation against my patron would deliver me; yet I was
silent, I armed myself with patience, uncertain whether it were better
to accuse or to die. Did this show me a man unworthy to be trusted?

"I determined to break out of prison. With infinite difficulty, and
repeated miscarriages, I at length effected my purpose. Instantly a
proclamation, with a hundred guineas reward, was issued for apprehending
me. I was obliged to take shelter among the refuse of mankind, in the
midst of a gang of thieves. I encountered the most imminent peril of my
life when I entered this retreat, and when I quitted it. Immediately
after, I travelled almost the whole length of the kingdom, in poverty
and distress, in hourly danger of being retaken and manacled like a
felon. I would have fled my country; I was prevented. I had recourse to
various disguises; I was innocent, and yet was compelled to as many arts
and subterfuges as could have been entailed on the worst of villains. In
London I was as much harassed and as repeatedly alarmed as I had been in
my flight through the country. Did all these persecutions persuade me to
put an end to my silence? No: I suffered them with patience and
submission; I did not make one attempt to retort them upon their author.

"I fell at last into the hands of the miscreants that are nourished with
human blood. In this terrible situation I, for the first time,
attempted, by turning informer, to throw the weight from myself. Happily
for me, the London magistrate listened to my tale with insolent
contempt.

"I soon, and long, repented of my rashness, and rejoiced in my
miscarriage.

"I acknowledge that, in various ways, Mr. Falkland showed humanity
towards me during this period. He would have prevented my going to
prison at first; he contributed towards my subsistence during my
detention; he had no share in the pursuit that had been set on foot
against me; he at length procured my discharge, when brought forward for
trial. But a great part of his forbearance was unknown to me; I supposed
him to be my unrelenting pursuer. I could not forget that, whoever
heaped calamities on me in the sequel, they all originated in his forged
accusation.

"The prosecution against me for felony was now at an end. Why were not
my sufferings permitted to terminate then, and I allowed to hide my
weary head in some obscure yet tranquil retreat? Had I not sufficiently
proved my constancy and fidelity? Would not a compromise in this
situation have been most wise and most secure? But the restless and
jealous anxiety of Mr. Falkland would not permit him to repose the least
atom of confidence. The only compromise that he proposed was that, with
my own hand, I should sign myself a villain. I refused this proposal,
and have ever since been driven from place to place, deprived of peace,
of honest fame, even of bread. For a long time I persisted in the
resolution that no emergency should convert me into the assailant. In an
evil hour I at last listened to my resentment and impatience, and the
hateful mistake into which I fell has produced the present scene.

"I now see that mistake in all its enormity. I am sure that if I had
opened my heart to Mr. Falkland, if I had told to him privately the tale
that I have now been telling, he could not have resisted my reasonable
demand. After all his precautions, he must ultimately have depended upon
my forbearance. Could he be sure that, if I were at last worked up to
disclose every thing I knew, and to enforce it with all the energy I
could exert, I should obtain no credit? If he must in every case be at
my mercy, in which mode ought he to have sought his safety, in
conciliation, or in inexorable cruelty?

"Mr. Falkland is of a noble nature. Yes; in spite of the catastrophe of
Tyrrel, of the miserable end of the Hawkinses, and of all that I have
myself suffered, I affirm that he has qualities of the most admirable
kind. It is therefore impossible that he could have resisted a frank and
fervent expostulation, the frankness and the fervour in which the whole
soul is poured out. I despaired, while it was yet time to have made the
just experiment; but my despair was criminal, was treason against the
sovereignty of truth.

"I have told a plain and unadulterated tale. I came hither to curse, but
I remain to bless. I came to accuse, but am compelled to applaud. I
proclaim to all the world, that Mr. Falkland is a man worthy of
affection and kindness, and that I am myself the basest and most odious
of mankind! Never will I forgive myself the iniquity of this day. The
memory will always haunt me, and embitter every hour of my existence.
In thus acting I have been a murderer--a cool, deliberate, unfeeling
murderer.--I have said what my accursed precipitation has obliged me to
say. Do with me as you please! I ask no favour. Death would be a
kindness, compared to what I feel!"

Such were the accents dictated by my remorse. I poured them out with
uncontrollable impetuosity; for my heart was pierced, and I was
compelled to give vent to its anguish. Every one that heard me, was
petrified with astonishment. Every one that heard me, was melted into
tears. They could not resist the ardour with which I praised the great
qualities of Falkland; they manifested their sympathy in the tokens of
my penitence.

How shall I describe the feelings of this unfortunate man? Before I
began, he seemed sunk and debilitated, incapable of any strenuous
impression. When I mentioned the murder, I could perceive in him an
involuntary shuddering, though it was counteracted partly by the
feebleness of his frame, and partly by the energy of his mind. This was
an allegation he expected, and he had endeavoured to prepare himself for
it. But there was much of what I said, of which he had had no previous
conception. When I expressed the anguish of my mind, he seemed at first
startled and alarmed, lest this should be a new expedient to gain credit
to my tale. His indignation against me was great for having retained all
my resentment towards him, thus, as it might be, to the last hour of his
existence. It was increased when he discovered me, as he supposed, using
a pretence of liberality and sentiment to give new edge to my hostility.
But as I went on he could no longer resist. He saw my sincerity; he was
penetrated with my grief and compunction. He rose from his seat,
supported by the attendants, and--to my infinite astonishment--threw
himself into my arms!

"Williams," said he, "you have conquered! I see too late the greatness
and elevation of your mind. I confess that it is to my fault and not
yours, that it is to the excess of jealousy that was ever burning in my
bosom, that I owe my ruin. I could have resisted any plan of malicious
accusation you might have brought against me. But I see that the artless
and manly story you have told, has carried conviction to every hearer.
All my prospects are concluded. All that I most ardently desired, is for
ever frustrated. I have spent a life of the basest cruelty, to cover one
act of momentary vice, and to protect myself against the prejudices of
my species. I stand now completely detected. My name will be consecrated
to infamy, while your heroism, your patience, and your virtues will be
for ever admired. You have inflicted on me the most fatal of all
mischiefs; but I bless the hand that wounds me. And now,"--turning to
the magistrate--"and now, do with me as you please. I am prepared to
suffer all the vengeance of the law. You cannot inflict on me more than
I deserve. You cannot hate me, more than I hate myself. I am the most
execrable of all villains. I have for many years (I know not how long)
dragged on a miserable existence in insupportable pain. I am at last, in
recompense for all my labours and my crimes, dismissed from it with the
disappointment of my only remaining hope, the destruction of that for
the sake of which alone I consented to exist. It was worthy of such a
life, that it should continue just long enough to witness this final
overthrow. If however you wish to punish me, you must be speedy in your
justice; for, as reputation was the blood that warmed my heart, so I
feel that death and infamy must seize me together."

I record the praises bestowed on me by Falkland, not because I deserved
them, but because they serve to aggravate the baseness of my cruelty. He
survived this dreadful scene but three days. I have been his murderer.
It was fit that he should praise my patience, who has fallen a victim,
life and fame, to my precipitation! It would have been merciful in
comparison, if I had planted a dagger in his heart. He would have
thanked me for my kindness. But, atrocious, execrable wretch that I have
been! I wantonly inflicted on him an anguish a thousand times worse than
death. Meanwhile I endure the penalty of my crime. His figure is ever in
imagination before me. Waking or sleeping, I still behold him. He seems
mildly to expostulate with me for my unfeeling behaviour. I live the
devoted victim of conscious reproach. Alas! I am the same Caleb Williams
that, so short a time ago, boasted that, however great were the
calamities I endured, I was still innocent.

Such has been the result of a project I formed, for delivering myself
from the evil that had so long attended me. I thought that, if Falkland
were dead, I should return once again to all that makes life worth
possessing. I thought that, if the guilt of Falkland were established,
fortune and the world would smile upon my efforts. Both these events are
accomplished; and it is now only that I am truly miserable.

Why should my reflections perpetually centre upon myself?--self, an
overweening regard to which has been the source of my errors! Falkland,
I will think only of thee, and from that thought will draw ever-fresh
nourishment for my sorrows! One generous, one disinterested tear I will
consecrate to thy ashes! A nobler spirit lived not among the sons of
men. Thy intellectual powers were truly sublime, and thy bosom burned
with a god-like ambition. But of what use are talents and sentiments in
the corrupt wilderness of human society? It is a rank and rotten soil,
from which every finer shrub draws poison as it grows. All that, in a
happier field and a purer air, would expand into virtue and germinate
into usefulness, is thus concerted into henbane and deadly nightshade.

Falkland! thou enteredst upon thy career with the purest and most
laudable intentions. But thou imbibedst the poison of chivalry with thy
earliest youth; and the base and low-minded envy that met thee on thy
return to thy native seats, operated with this poison to hurry thee into
madness. Soon, too soon, by this fatal coincidence, were the blooming
hopes of thy youth blasted for ever. From that moment thou only
continuedst to live to the phantom of departed honour. From that moment
thy benevolence was, in a great part, turned into rankling jealousy and
inexorable precaution. Year after year didst thou spend in this
miserable project of imposture; and only at last continuedst to live,
long enough to see, by my misjudging and abhorred intervention, thy
closing hope disappointed, and thy death accompanied with the foulest
disgrace!

I began these memoirs with the idea of vindicating my character. I have
now no character that I wish to vindicate: but I will finish them that
thy story may be fully understood; and that, if those errors of thy life
be known which thou so ardently desiredst to conceal, the world may at
least not hear and repeat a half-told and mangled tale.



THE END.




DAMON

AND

DELIA:

A TALE.

--NEQUE SEMPER ARCUM
TENDIT APOLLO.         HOR.

LONDON:
PRINTED  FOR T. HOOKHAM, AT HIS CIRCULATING
LIBRARY, NEW BOND-STEET, CORNER
OF BRUTON-STREET.
M,DCC,LXXXIV.


CONTENTS


PART the FIRST.


CHAPTER I.

_Containing introductory Matter._


CHAPTER II.

_A Ball_


CHAPTER III.

_A Ghost._


CHAPTER IV.

_A love Scene._


CHAPTER V.

_A Man of Humour._


CHAPTER VI.

_Containing some Specimens of Heroism._


CHAPTER VII.

_Containing that with which the Reader will be acquainted when he has
read it._


CHAPTER VIII.

_Two Persons of Fashion._


CHAPTER IX.

_A tragical Resolution._




CONTENTS.


PART the SECOND.


CHAPTER I.

_In which the Story begins over again_.


CHAPTER II.

_The History of Mr. Godfrey_.


CHAPTER III.

_A Misanthrope_.


CHAPTER IV.

_Much ado about nothing_.


CHAPTER V.

_A Woman of learning_.


CHAPTER VI.

_A Catastrophe_.


CHAPTER VII.

_Containing what will terrify the Reader_.


CHAPTER VIII.

_A Denouement_.


CHAPTER IX.

_Which dismisses the Reader_.





DAMON

AND

DELIA.


PART the FIRST.


CHAPTER I.

_Containing introductory matter_.


The races at Southampton have, for time immemorial, constituted a scene of
rivalship, war, and envy. All the passions incident to the human frame
have here assumed as true a scope, as in the more noisy and more tragical
contentions of statesmen and warriors. Here nature has displayed her most
hidden attractions, and art has furnished out the artillery of beauty.
Here the coquet has surprised, and the love-sick nymph has sapped the
heart of the unwary swain. The scene has been equally sought by the bolder
and more haughty, as by the timid sex. Here the foxhunter has sought a new
subject of his boast in the _nonchalance_ of _dishabille_; the
peer has played off the dazzling charms of a coronet and a star; and the
_petit maître_ has employed the anxious niceties of dress.

Of all the beauties in this brilliant circle, she, who was incomparably
the most celebrated, was the graceful Delia. Her person, though not
absolutely tall, had an air of dignity. Her form was bewitching, and her
neck was alabaster. Her cheeks glowed with the lovely vermilion of nature,
her mouth was small and pouting, her lips were coral, and her teeth whiter
than the driven snow. Her forehead was bold, high, and polished, her
eyebrows were arched, and from beneath them her fine blue eyes shone with
intelligence, and sparkled with heedless gaiety. Her hair was of the
brightest auburn, it was in the greatest abundance, and when, unfettered
by the ligaments of fashion, it flowed about her shoulders and her lovely
neck, it presented the most ravishing object that can possibly be
imagined.

With all this beauty, it Cannot be supposed but that Delia was followed by
a train of admirers. The celebrated Mr. Prattle, for whom a thousand fair
ones cracked their fans and tore their caps, was one of the first to
enlist himself among her adorers. Squire Savage, the fox-hunter, who, like
Hippolitus of old, chased the wily fox and timid hare, and had never yet
acknowledged the empire of beauty, was subdued by the artless sweetness of
Delia. Nay, it has been reported, that the incomparable lord Martin, a
peer of ten thousand pounds a year, had made advances to her father. It is
true, his lordship was scarcely four feet three inches in stature, his
belly was prominent, one leg was half a foot shorter, and one shoulder
half a foot higher than the other. His temper was as crooked as his shape;
the sight of a happy human being would give him the spleen; and no mortal
man could long reside under the same roof with him. But in spite of these
trifling imperfections, it has been confidently affirmed, that some of the
haughtiest beauties of Hampshire would have been proud of his alliance.

Thus assailed with all the temptations that human nature could furnish, it
might naturally be supposed, that Delia had long since resigned her heart.
But in this conjecture, however natural, the reader will find himself
mistaken. She seemed as coy as Daphne, and as cold as Diana. She diverted
herself indeed with the insignificant loquaciousness of Mr. Prattle, and
the aukward gallantry of the Squire; but she never bestowed upon either a
serious thought. And for lord Martin, who was indisputably allowed to be
the best match in the county, she could not bear to hear him named with
patience, and she always turned pale at the sight of him.

But Delia was not destined always to laugh at the darts of Cupid. Mrs.
Bridget her waiting maid, delighted to run over the list of her adorers,
and she was much more eloquent and more copious upon the subject than we
have been. When her mistress received the mention of each with gay
indifference, Mrs. Bridget would close the dialogue, and with a sagacious
look, and a shake of her head, would tell the lovely Delia, that the
longer it was before her time came, the more surely and the more deeply
she would be caught at last. And to say truth, the wisest philosopher
might have joined in the verdict of the sage Bridget. There was a softness
in the temper of Delia, that seemed particularly formed for the tender
passion. The voice of misery never assailed her ear in vain. Her purse was
always open to the orphan, the maimed, and the sick. After reading a
tender tale of love, the intricacies of the Princess of Cleves, the soft
distress of Sophia Western, or the more modern story of the Sorrows of
Werter, her gentle breast would heave with sighs, and her eye, suffused
with tears, confess a congenial spirit.

The father of Delia--let the reader drop a tear over this blot in our
little narrative--had once been a tradesman. He was naturally phlegmatic,
methodical, and avaricious. His ear was formed to relish better the hoarse
voice of an exchange broker, than the finest tones of Handel's organ. He
found something much more agreeable and interesting in the perusal of his
ledger and his day book, than in the scenes of Shakespeare, or the
elegance of Addison. With this disposition, he had notwithstanding, when
age had chilled the vigour of his limbs, and scattered her snow over those
hairs which had escaped the hands of the barber, resigned his shop, and
retired to enjoy the fruits of his industry. It is as natural for a
tradesman in modern times to desire to die in the tranquillity of a
gentleman, as it was for the Saxon kings of the Heptarchy to act the same
inevitable scene amidst the severities of a cloister.

The old gentleman however found, and it is not impossible that some of his
brethren may have found it before him, when the great transaction was
irretrievably over, that retirement and indolence did not constitute the
situation for which either nature or habit had fitted him. It has been
observed by some of those philosophers who have made the human mind the
object of their study, that idleness is often the mother of love. It might
indeed have been supposed, that Mr. Hartley, for that was his name, by
having attained the age of sixty, might have outlived every danger of this
kind. But opportunity and temptation supplied that, which might have been
deficient on the side of nature.

Within a little mile of the mansion in which he had taken up his retreat,
resided two ancient maiden ladies. Under cover of the venerable age to
which they had attained, they had laid aside many of those modes which
coyness and modesty have prescribed to their sex. The visits of a man were
avowedly as welcome to them, and indeed much more so, than those of a
woman. Their want of attractions either external or mental, had indeed
hindered the circle of their acquaintance from being very extensive; but
there were some, as well as Mr. Hartley, who preferred the company of
ugliness, censoriousness and ill nature to solitude.

Such were the Miss Cranley's, the name of the elder of whom was Amelia,
and that of the younger Sophia. Miss Amelia was nominally forty, and her
sister thirty years of age. Perhaps if we stated the matter more
accurately, we should rate the elder at fifty-six, and the younger
somewhere about fifty. They both of them were masculine in their
behaviour, and studious in their disposition. Miss Amelia, delighted in
the study of theology; she disputed with the curate, maintained a godly
correspondence with a neighbouring cobler, and was even said to be
preparing a pamphlet in defence of the dogmas of Mr. Whitfield. Miss
Sophia, who will make a much more considerable figure in this history, was
altogether as indefatigable in the study of politics, as her sister was in
that of theology. She adhered indeed to none of our political parties, for
she suspected and despised them all. My lord North she treated as stupid,
sleepy, and void of personal principle. Mr. Fox was a brawling gamester,
devoid of all attachments but that of ambition, and who treated the mob
with flattery and contempt. Mr. Burke was a Jesuit in disguise, who under
the most specious professions, was capable of the blackest and meanest
actions. For her own part she was a steady republican. That couplet of Dr.
Garth was continually in her mouth,


          _From my very soul I hate,
           All kings and ministers of state._




CHAPTER II.

_A Ball._


Thus much it was necessary to premise, in order to acquaint the reader
with the situation of our heroine, and that of some other personages in
this history. Having discharged this task, we will return to the point
from which we set out.

It was at one of the balls at the races at Southampton--the company was
already assembled. The card tables were set, and our maiden ladies,
together with many other venerable pieces of antiquity, were assembled
around them. In another and more spacious room, appeared all that
Southampton could boast of youth and beauty. The squire and his sister,
Mr. Prattle, and lord Martin, formed a part of the company. The first
bustle was nearly composed, when Damon entered the assembly.

He appeared to be a stranger to every body present. And, as he is equally
a stranger to our readers, we will now announce him in proper form. Damon
appeared to be about twenty years of age. His person was tall, and his
limbs slender and well formed. His dress was elegance itself. His coat was
ornamented with a profusion of lace, and the diamond sparkled in his shoe.
His countenance was manly and erect. There appeared in it a noble
confidence, which the spectator would at first sight ascribe to dignity of
birth, and a perfect familiarity with whatever is elegant and polite. This
confidence however had not the least alloy of _hauteur_, his eye
expressed the most open sensibility and the kindest sympathy.

There is something undescribably interesting in the figure we have
delineated. The moment our hero entered the room, the attention of every
person present was fixed upon him. The master of the ceremonies
immediately advanced, and escorted him to the most honourable seat that
yet remained vacant. While Damon examined with an eager eye the gay
parterre of beauty that appeared before him, a general whisper was excited
upon his account. "Who is he?" "Who is he?" echoed from every corner of
the room. But while curiosity was busy in his enquiries, there was not an
individual capable of satisfying them.

The business of every one was now the choice of a partner. But as one
object had engrossed the attention of all, they were willing to see the
election he would make, though every one feared to lose the partner he had
destined for himself. Damon was therefore, however unwilling to
distinguish himself in so particular a manner, constrained to advance the
foremost. He passed slightly along before a considerable number, who sat
in expectation. At length he approached the seat of Delia. He bowed to her
in the most graceful manner, and intreated to be honoured with her hand.
She smiled assent, and they crossed the room among a croud of envious
rivals. Besides the lovers we had mentioned, there were four others, who
had secretly determined to dance with Delia.

But if the gentlemen were disappointed, to whose eyes the beauty of Delia,
however unrivalled, was familiar, the disappointment and envy of the fair
sex upon the loss of Damon, whose external and natural recommendations had
beside the grace of novelty, were inexpressible. The daughter of Mr.
Griskin, an eminent butcher in Clare-market, who had indeed from nature,
the grace of being cross-eyed, now looked in ten thousand more various
directions than she ever did before. Miss Prim, agitated in every limb,
cracked her fan into twenty pieces. Miss Gawky, who had unfortunately been
initiated by the chamber maid in the art of snuff-taking, plied her box
with more zeal than ever. Miss Languish actually fainted, and was with
some difficulty conveyed into the air. Such was the confusion occasioned
in the ball at Southampton, by the election of Damon.

Affairs being now somewhat adjusted, the dances began. Damon at every
interval addressed himself to his lovely partner in the easiest and most
elegant conversation. He talked with fluency, and his air and manner gave
a grace and dignity to the most trifling topics. The heart of Delia,
acknowledged the charms of youthful beauty and graceful deportment, and
secretly confessed that it had never before encountered so formidable an
enemy.

When the usual topics of conversation had been exhausted, the behaviour of
Damon became insensibly more particular, he pressed her hand with the most
melting ardour, and a sigh ever and anon escaped from his breast. He paid
her several very elegant compliments, though they were all of them
confined within the limits of decorum. Delia, on the other hand, though
she apparently received them with the most gay indifference, in reality
drank deep of the poison of love, and the words of Damon made an
impression upon her heart, that was not easily to be erased.

But however delicious was the scene in which they were engaged, it
necessarily drew to a conclusion. The drowsy clocks now announced the hour
of three in the morning. The dances broke up, and the company separated.
Delia leaped into the chariot that was waiting, and quickly arrived at the
parental mansion. Fatigued with the various objects that had passed before
her, she immediately retired to rest. For some time however a busy train
of thoughts detained her from the empire of sleep. "How lovely a stranger!
How elegant his manners, and how brilliant his wit! How soft and engaging
the whole of his behaviour! But ah! was this the fruit of reverence and
admiration? Might it not be no more than general gallantry? Oh that I were
mistress of his heart! That he would lay his person at my feet! What a
contrast between him and my former admirers! How doubly hateful does lord
Martin, the lover favoured by my father now appear! But ah! who is this
Damon? What is his fortune, and what his pretensions? His dress surely
bespoke him a man of rank. His elegant manners could have been learned in
no vulgar circle. How sweet, methinks is suspence! How delightful the
uncertainty that hangs about him! And yet, how glad should I be to have my
doubts resolved."

Soothed with these and similar reflections, the lovely maid fell asleep.
But even in sleep she did not forget the impressions she had received. She
imagined that Damon now approached her pillow. But how unlike the Damon
she had seen! His eyes had something in them superior to a mortal. His
shoulders were adorned with wings, and a vest of celestial azure flowed
around him. He smiled upon her with the most bewitching grace. But the
gentle maid involuntarily stretched out her arms towards him, and the
pleasing vision vanished from her sight.

Again she closed her eyes, and again she endeavoured to regain her former
object. Damon indeed appeared, but in how different a manner! his
countenance was impressed with every mark of horror, and he seemed to fly
before some who inveterately pursued him. They appeared with the
countenances of furies, and the snakes hissed around their temples. Delia
looked earnestly upon them, and presently recollected the features of the
admirers we have already celebrated. The noble peer under the figure of
Tisiphone, led the troop. Damon stumbled and fell. Sudden as lightning
Tisiphone reached the spot, and plunged a dagger in his heart. She drew it
forth reeking with blood, and the lovely youth appeared in the agonies of
death. Terrified beyond measure, Delia screamed with horror and awoke.

In the midst of reveries like these, now agitated with apprehension, and
now soothed with pleasure, Delia passed the night. The sun appeared, her
gold repeater informed her that it was twelve, and, assisted by the fair
hands of Mrs. Bridget, she began to rise.




CHAPTER III.

_A Ghost._


Mr. Hartley had breakfasted and walked out in the fields, before Delia
appeared. She had scarcely begun her morning repast, ere Miss Fletcher,
the favourite companion and confidante of Delia, entered the room. "My
dearest creature," cried the visitor, "how do you do? Had not we not a
most charming evening? I vow I was fatigued to death: and then, lord
Martin, I think he never appeared to so much advantage. Why he was quite
covered with diamonds, spangles, and frogs." "Ah!" cried Delia, "but the
young stranger." "True," answered Miss Fletcher, "I liked him of all
things; so tall, so genteel, and so sweetly perfumed.--I cannot think who
he is. I called upon Miss Griskin, and I called upon Miss Savage, nobody
knows. He is some great man." "When did he come to town?" said Delia,
"Where does he lodge?" "My dear, he came to town yesterday in the evening,
and went away again as soon as the ball was over. But do not you think
that Mr. Prattle's new suit of scarlet sattin was vastly becoming? I vow I
could have fallen in love with him. He is so gay and so trifling, and so
fond of hearing himself talk. Why, does not he say a number of smart
things?" "It is exessively strange," said Delia. (She was thinking of the
stranger.) But Miss Fletcher went on--"Not at all, my life. Upon my word I
think he is always very entertaining. He cuts out paper so prettily, and he
has drawn me the sweetest pattern for an apron. I vow, I think, I never
showed you it." "What can be his name?" said Delia; "His name, my dear;
law, child, you do not hear a word one says to you. But of all things,
give me the green coat and pink breeches of Mr. Savage. But did you ever
hear the like? There will be a terrible to do--Lord Martin is in such a
quandary--He has sent people far and near." "I wish they may find him,"
exclaimed Delia. "Nay, if they do, I would not be in his shoes for the
world. My lord vows revenge. He says he is his rival. Why, child, the
stranger did not make love to you, did he?" "Mercy on us," cried Delia,
"then my dream is out." "Oh, bless us," said Miss Fletcher, "what dream,
my dear?" Her curiosity then prevailed upon her to be silent for a few
moments, while Delia related that with which the reader is already
acquainted.

In return, Delia requested of her friend to explain to her more
intelligibly what she hinted of the anger of lord Martin. "Why, my dear,
his lordship has been employed all this morning in writing challenges.
They say he has not writ less than a dozen, and has sent them by as many
messengers, like a hue and cry, all over the county--my lord is a little
man--but what of that--he is as stout as Hercules, and as brave as
what-d'ye call'um, that you and I read of in Pope's Homer. He is in such a
vengeance of a passion, that he cannot contain himself. He tells it to
every body he sees; and his mother and sister run about the house
screaming and fainting like so many mad things."

Delia, as we have already said, was endowed with a competent share of
natural understanding. She therefore easily perceived, that from an anger
so boisterous and so public, no very fatal effects were to be apprehended.
This reflection quieted the terrors that her dream had excited, and which
the young partiality she began to feel for the amiable stranger would
otherwise have confirmed. Her breast being thus calmed, she made about
half a dozen morning visits, among which, one to Miss Griskin, and another
to Miss Languish, were included. The conversation every where turned upon
the outrageousness of lord Martin. All but the gentle Delia, were full of
anxiety and expectation. The females were broken into parties respecting
the event of the duel. Many trembled for the fate of lord Martin, so
splendid, so rich, and consequently, in their opinion, so amiable and so
witty. Others, guided by the unadulterated sentiments of nature, poured
forth all their vows for the courteous unknown. "May those active limbs
remain without a wound! May his elegant blue and silver never be stained
with blood! Ah, what a pity, that eyes so bright, and teeth so white,
should be shrowded in the darkness of the grave."

The dinner, a vulgar meal, that passed exactly in the same manner as fifty
dinners had before it, shall be consigned to silence. The evening was
bright and calm. It was in the close of autumn; and every thing tempted
our lovely fair one to take the air. By the way she called upon her
inseparable friend and companion. They directed their course towards the
sea side.

Here they had not advanced far, before they entered a grove, a spot
particularly the favourite of Delia. In a little opening there was a bank
embroidered with daisies and butter-cups; a little row of willows bending
their heads forward, formed a kind of canopy; and directly before it,
there was a vista through the trees, which afforded a distant prospect of
the sea, with every here and there a vessel passing along, and the beams
of the setting sun quivered on the waves.

Delia and her companion advanced towards the well known spot. The mellow
voice of the thrush, and the clear pipe of the blackbird, diversified at
intervals with the tender notes of the nightingale, formed the most
agreable natural concert. The breast of Delia, framed for softness and
melancholy, was filled with sensations responsive to the objects around
her, and even the eternal clack of Miss Fletcher was still.

Presently, however, a new and unexpected object claimed their attention. A
note, stronger and sweeter than that of any of the native choristers of
the grove, swelled upon the air, and floated towards them. Having
approached a few paces, they stood still to listen. It seemed to proceed
from a flute, played upon by a human voice. The air was melancholy, but
the skill was divine.

The native curiosity of Miss Fletcher was not upon this occasion a match
for the sympathetic spirit of Delia. She pressed forward with an eager and
uncertain step, and looking through an interstice formed by two venerable
oaks, she perceived the figure of a young man sitting in her favourite
alcove. His back was turned towards the side upon which she was. Having
finished the air, he threw his flute carelesly from him, and folded his
arms in a posture the most disconsolate that can be imagined. He rose and
advanced a little with an irregular step. "Ah lovely mistress of my soul,"
cried he, "thou little regardest the anguish that must for ever be an
inmate of this breast! While I am a prey to a thousand tormenting
imaginations, thou riotest in the empire of beauty, heedless of the wounds
thou inflicted, and the slaves thou chainest to thy chariot. Wretch that I
am, what is to be done? But I must think no more." Saying this he snatched
up his flute, and thrusting it into his bosom, hurried out of the grove.

While he spoke, Delia imagined that the voice was one that she had heard
before though she knew not where. Her heart whispered her something more
than her understanding could disentangle. But as he stooped to take his
flute from the ground his profile was necessarily turned towards the inner
part of the grove. Delia started and trembled. Damon stood confessed. But
she scarcely recollected his features before he rushed away swifter than
the winged hawk, and was immediately out of sight.

Delia was too full of a thousand reflections upon this unexpected
rencounter to be able to utter a word. But Miss Fletcher immediately
began. "God bless us," cried she, "did you ever see the like? Why it is my
belief it is a ghost or a wizard. I never heard any thing so pretty--I
vow, I am terribly frightened."

Delia now caught hold of her arm. "For heaven's sake, let us quit the
grove. I do not know what is the matter--but I feel myself quite sick."
"Good God! good heavens! Well, I do not wonder you are all in a
tremble--But suppose now it should be nothing but Mr. Prattle--He is
always somewhere or other--And then he plays _God save the king_, and
_Darby and Joan_, like any thing." "Oh," said the lovely, trembling
nymph, "they were the sweetest notes!" "Ah," said her companion, "he is a
fine man. And then he is so modest--He will play at one and thirty, and
ride upon a stick with little Tommy all day long. But sure it could not be
Mr. Prattle--He always wears his hair in a queue you know--but the ghost
had a bag and solitaire." "Well," cried Delia, "let us think no more of
it. But did we hear anything?"--"Law, child, why he played the nicest
glee--and then he made such a speech, for all the world like Mr. Button,
that I like so to see in Hamlet." "True," said Delia,--"but what he said
was more like the soft complainings of my dear Castalio. Did not he
complain of a false mistress?" "Why he did say something of that kind.--If
it be neither a ghost nor Mr. Prattle. I hope in God he is going to appear
upon the Southampton stage. I do so love to see a fine young man come on
for the first time with

          _May this alspishus day be ever sacred!_
Or,
          _I am thy father's spirit._"




CHAPTER IV.

_A Love Scene._


In such conversation the moments passed till they reached the habitation
of Mr. Hartley. Miss Fletcher now took her leave. And after a supper as
dull, and much more tedious to Delia, than the dinner, she retired to her
chamber.

She retired indeed, but not to rest. Her brain was filled with a croud of
uneasy thoughts. "Alas," said she, "how short has been the illusion!--But
yesterday, I was flushed with all the pride of conquest, and busily framed
a thousand schemes of ideal happiness--Where are they now?--The lovely
youth, the only man I ever saw in whose favour my heart was prepossessed,
and with whom I should have felt no repugnance to have engaged in the
tenderest ties, is nothing to me--He loves another. He too complains of
slighted passion, and ill-fated love. Ah, had he made his happiness depend
on me, what would not I have done to reward him! Carefully I would have
soothed every anguish, and taught his heart to bound with joy. But what am
I saying?--Where am I going?--Am I that Delia that bad defiance to the art
of men,--that saw with indifference the havock that my charms had made!
With every opening morn I smiled. Each hour was sped with joy, and my
heart was light and frolic. And shall I dwindle into a pensive, melancholy
maid, the sacrifice of one that heeds me not, whose sighs no answering
sighs encounter!--let it not be said. I have hitherto asserted the
independence of my sex, I will continue to do so. Too amiable unknown, I
give thee to the winds! Propitious fate, I thank thee that thou hast so
soon discovered how much my partiality was misplaced. I will abjure it
before it be too late. I will tear the little intruder from my heart
before the mischief is become irretrievable."

The following evening Delia repaired again by a kind of irresistible
impulse to the grove. She asked not the company of her friend. She dared
alone hazard the encounter of that object, at which she had trembled so
much the preceding day. Unknown to herself she still imaged a kind of
uncertainty in her fate which would not permit her to lay aside all
thought of Damon. She determined at all events, to have her doubts
resolved. "When there is no longer," said she to herself, "any room for
mistake, I shall then know what to do."

As she drew near the alcove, she perceived the same figure stretched along
the bank, and with his eyes immoveably fixed upon a little fountain that
rose in a corner of the scene. He seemed lost in thought. Delia approached
doubtfully, but he heard her not. Advanced near to her object, she
reclined forward in a posture of wonder and attention. At this moment a
sigh burst from the heart of Damon, and he raised himself upon the seat.

His eyes caught the figure of Delia.------"Ah," said he, starting from his
trance, "what do I see? Art thou, lovely intruder, a mere vision, an
aerial being that shuns the touch?" "I beg ten thousand pardons. I meaned
not, sir, to interrupt you. I will be gone." "No, go not." Answered he.
"Thou art welcome to my troubled thoughts. I could gaze for ever."

Saying this he rose and advancing towards her, seized her hand. "Be not
afraid," said he, "gentle fair one, my breast is a stranger to violence
and rudeness. I have felt the dart of love. Unhappy myself, I learn to
feel for others. But you are happy." As he said this, a tear unbidden
stole into the eye of Delia, and she wiped it away with the hand which was
disengaged from his. "And dost thou pity me," said he. "And does such
softness dwell within thy breast? If you knew the story of my woes, you
would have reason to pity me. I am in love to destraction, but I dare not
disclose my passion. I am banished from the presence of her I love. Ah,
cruel fate, I am entangled, inextricably entangled." "And how, sir," said
Delia, "can I serve you?" "Alas," said he, in no way. My case is hopeless
and irretrievable. And what am I doing? Why do I talk, when the season
calls for action? Oh, I am lost."

"Dear Sir," answered Delia, "you terrify me to death." "Oh, no. I would
not for the world give you an uneasy moment. Let me be unhappy--but may
misfortune never disturb your tranquility. I return to seek her whose fate
is surely destined to mix with mine. Pardon, loveliest of thy sex, the
distraction in which I have appeared. I would ask you to forget me--I
would ask you to remember me--I know not what I am, or what to think."

With these words he took the hand which he still held in one of his, and
raising it to his lips, kissed it with the utmost fervour. Immediately he
caught up his hat, which lay beside him on the ground, and began to
advance along the path that led out of the grove on the side furthest from
the town. But his eyes were still fixed upon Delia. He heeded not the path
by which he went; and scarcely had he gone twenty paces, ere he changed
his mind and returned. Delia was seated on the bank and seemed lost in
reverie. Damon threw himself upon his knees before her.

"Ah, why," said he, "am I constrained to depart!--Why must I talk in
riddles! Perhaps we may never see each other more. Perhaps the time will
come when I shall be able to clear up the obscurity that at present I am
obliged to preserve. But no, it cannot be. I never was happy but for two
poor hours that I enjoyed your smiles, and, drinking in the poison of your
charms, I forgot myself. The time too soon arrived for bitter
recollection. My mistress calls, the mistress of my fate. I must be
gone--Farewel--for ever."

Saying this, he heaved a sigh that seemed almost to tear his breast
asunder, and with the utmost apparent violence he tore himself away, and
rushed along the path with incredible velocity.

Delia was now alone. But instead, as she had flattered herself of having
her doubts resolved, she was more uncertain, more perplexed than ever.
"What" cried she, "can all this mean? How strange, and how inexplicable!
Is it a real person that I have seen, or is it a vision that mocks my
fancy? Am I loved, or am I hated? Oh, foolish question! Oh, fond illusion!
Are we not parted for ever! Is he not gone to seek the mistress of his
soul! Alas, he views me not, but with that general complacency, which
youth, and the small pretensions I have to beauty are calculated to
excite! He had nothing to relate that concerned myself, he merely intended
to make me the confidante of his passion for another. Too surely he is
unhappy. His heart seemed ready to burst with sorrow. Probably in this
situation there is no greater or more immediate relief, than to disclose
the subject of our distress, and to receive into our bosom the sympathetic
tear of a simple and a generous heart. His behaviour today corresponds but
too well with the suspicions that yesterday excited. Oh, Delia! then,"
added she, "be firm. Thou shalt see the conqueror no more. Think of him no
more."

In spite however of all the resolution she could muster, Delia repaired
day after day, sometimes alone, and sometimes in company with her friend,
to that spot which, by the umbrage of melancholy it wore, was become more
interesting than ever. Miss Fletcher, could scarcely at first be persuaded
to direct her course that way, lest she should again see the ghost. But
she need not have terrified herself. No ghost appeared.

Disappointed and baffled on this side, Delia by the strictest enquiries
endeavoured to find out who the unknown person was, in whose fate she had
become so greatly interested. The result of these enquiries, however
diligent, was not entirely satisfactory. She learned that he had been for
a few days upon a visit to a Mr. Moreland, a gentleman who lived about
three miles from Southampton.

Mr. Moreland was a person of a very singular character. He had the
reputation in the neighbourhood of being a cynic, a misanthrope, and a
madman. He kept very little company, and was even seldom seen but by
night. He had a garden sufficiently spacious, which was carefully rendered
impervious to every human eye. And to this and his house he entirely
confined himself in the day-time. The persons he saw were not the
gentlemen of the neighbourhood. He had no toleration for characters that
did not interest him. When he first came down to his present residence, he
was visited by Mr. Hartley, Mr. Prattle, squire Savage, lord Martin, and
all the most admired personages in the country. But their visits had never
been returned. Mr. Prattle pronounced him a scoundrel; squire Savage said
he was a nincompoop; and lord Martin was near sending him a challenge. But
the censures of the former, and the threats of the latter, had never
reached his ears. His domestics were numerous, but they were hired from a
distance, and were permitted as little communication as possible with the
powdered lacquies of Southampton. Of consequence, however much the
unaccommodating conduct of Mr. Moreland disposed his neighbours to
calumniate him, scandal was deprived of that daily food which is requisite
for her subsistence, and the name of that gentleman was scarcely ever
heard.




CHAPTER V.

_A Man of Humour._


We will now return to lord Martin. All his messengers, from what cruel
fate we cannot exactly ascertain, miscarried; and it was not till Damon
had left the country, that he learned that he had been a visitor at the
house of Mr. Moreland. Finding that he had missed his expected vengeance,
he discharged his anger in unavailing curses, and for three days he
breathed nothing but daggers, death, and damnation. Having thus vapoured
away the paroxysm of his fury, he became tolerably composed.

But adverse fate had decreed a short duration to the tranquility of his
lordship. Scarcely had the field been cleared from the enemy he so greatly
dreaded, ere a new rival came upon the stage, to whose arms, though
without any great foundation, the whole town of Southampton had consigned
the charming Delia.

The name of this gentleman was Prettyman. He was just returned from his
travels, and was reckoned perfectly accomplished. He was six foot high,
his shoulders were broad, his legs brawny, and his whole person athletic.
The habits however he had formed to himself in foreign countries, will not
perhaps be allowed exactly to correspond with the figure which nature had
bestowed upon him. He generally spent two hours every morning at his
toilette. His face was painted and patched, his whole person strongly
perfumed, and he had continually in his hand a gold snuff-box set with
diamonds. His voice was naturally hoarse and loud, but with infinite
industry he had brought himself to a pronunciation shrill, piping, and
effeminate. His conversion was larded with foreign phrases and foreign
oaths, and every thing he said was accompanied with a significant shrug.

The same period which had introduced this new pretender to the heart of
Delia, had been distinguished by the arrival of a Sir William Twyford, who
paid his addresses to Miss Fletcher. Sir William was exactly the reverse
of Mr. Prettyman. With a genteel person, and an open and agreable
phisiognomy, his manners were perfectly careless and unstudied. A
predominant feature in his character was good nature. But this was not his
ruling passion. He had an infinite fund of wit and humour, and he never
was so happy as when he was able to place the foibles of affectation in a
whimsical and ridiculous light.

As it was vanity alone, that had induced Mr. Prettyman to pay his
addresses to the lady, who was universally allowed to surpass in beauty
and every elegant accomplishment in the place in which he was, he would
have been less pleased that his amour should have terminated in a
marriage, than that by his affectation and coquetry he might break the
heart of the simple fair one. Accordingly, it was his business to make the
affair as public as possible.

Lord Martin, had been sufficiently irritated by the pretensions of Damon.
The new intruder had wrought up his passion to the highest pitch. In the
mean time he had renewed an acquaintance which he had formerly made with
sir William Twyford. Sir William, upon all occasions, cultivated the
intimacy of such, as, by any striking peculiarities, seemed to furnish a
proper subject for his humour. He now contributed every thing in his power
to inflame his lordship against Mr. Prettyman. He offered to become the
bearer of a challenge, and to be his lordship's second in any future
combat.

Lord Martin broke off the conversation somewhat abruptly, and began to
reflect with himself upon what had passed. He had hitherto contrived, by
some means or other, though he dealt very largely in challenges, never to
have come to actual battle. But he had too much reason to think, that if
he made sir William his messenger, he should not be able with any degree
of honour to contrive an evasion. "It is true," said he, "I am in a most
confounded passion, but a wise general never proceeds to action without
having first deliberated. Zounds, blood and fire! would I could put an end
to the existence of so presumptuous a villain! But then it must be
considered that Mr. Prettyman is six foot high, and I am not five. He is
as athletic as Ajax, but to me nature has been unfavourable. It is true I
understand cart and terce, parry and thrust, but I have heard that
Prettyman studied under Olivier. Many a man has outlived the passage of a
bullet, or the thrust of a sword through him. But my constitution is so
delicate! Curse blast it, death and the devil, I do not know what to do."

Sir William, as soon as he had left lord Martin, repaired to the lodgings
of Mr. Prettyman. After a short general conversation, he began, "My dear
friend, here has happened the unluckiest thing in nature. You have made
some advances, you know, to the charming Delia." "True," cried Prettyman,
"I have bestowed upon her a few condescending glances. _C'est une
charmante fille_." "Well," added sir William, "and the whole town gives
her to you." "_Parbleu!_ the town is very impertinent. There will go
two words to that bargain." "My lord Martin, you know, has enlisted
himself amongst her admirers." "Pox take the blockhead, I suppose he would
marry her. _Bien_. After I have led her a dance, he shall do what he
pleases with her." "But," said sir William, "my lord intends to call you
to an account." "_Morbleu_," cried Prettyman, "I thought I had
been in a land of liberty." "But let me tell you, my lord is very
absolute. He has fought some half a dozen duels in his time, and every
body is afraid of him." "_J'en suis excèdè_. 'Pon honour, the girl is
not worth fighting for." "Oh," said the malicious wit, "but if you give
her up for a few threats, your reputation will be ruined for ever."
"_Mon Dieu!_ this reputation is a very expensive thing. _Je
crois_ that every girl is a Helen, never so happy as when people are
murdering one another, and towns are fired for her sake. Is this same
_milord_ absolutely inexorable?"

"I cannot tell," said sir William, "what may be done. If you were to fly,
he would pursue you to the ends of the earth. But suppose now you were
upon your knees, to retract your pretensions to this silly girl."
"_Pardi_" answered Prettyman, "that is damned hard! are you sure his
lordship is so compleat a master of the science of defence?" "Nay,"
replied sir William, "I cannot tell. I believe indeed he never received a
wound, but I think I remember to have heard of one duel he fought, in
which his antagonist came off with his life." "Ah, _diable
l'emporte!_ That will not do neither. These bullets are the aukwardest
things in the world. Do you think you could not prevail with his Lordship
to use only powder?" "Powder," cried sir William, "that is an excellent
jest. My lord always loads with six small slugs." "Six slugs! ah the
bloody minded villain! It is confounded hard that a gentleman cannot pass
through life, without being _degoutè_ with these unpolished Vandals.
_Ah, mon cher ami_, I will put the affair entirely into your hands:
do, _pour i'amour de Dieu_, bring me out of this scrape as well as
you can." "Well my dear Prettyman, I will exert myself on your account;
but, upon my soul, I had rather have an affair with half a regiment of
commissioned officers fresh imported from America."

Sir William Twyford, having thus brought the affair to some degree of
forwardness, now waited on his lordship. "My dear lord Martin," said he,
"what have you resolved upon? The affair is briefly thus--you must either
give up Delia, or fight Mr. Prettyman." "Give up Delia!" exclaimed the
little lord; "by all that is sacred I will sooner spill the last drop of
my blood. But," added he, "what necessity is there for the alternative you
propose? True, I fear no man. But to be continually engaged in quarrels
would acquire me the character of a desperado." "Indeed," said sir
William, "you have been somewhat lavish in those sort of affairs, but I do
not see how you can be off in the present instance. Prettyman has heard of
the bustle you made about the fellow at the ball, that tricked you of your
partner; and he will never pardon the affront, if you pay less attention
to him." "Pox take the blockhead, he is mighty nice, methinks, in his
temper. I have a great mind not to gratify him." "Oh," cried sir William,
"you never had such an opportunity to establish your character for ever.
And the fellow I believe is no better than a coward at bottom."

It would be endless to relate all the stratagems of sir William to bring
the business to the conclusion he wished. How he terrified the brawny
_petit maître_, and anon he animated the little peer. His lordship
felt the force of his friend's eloquence, but even his highest flights of
heroism were qualified with temporary misgivings. For poor Mr. Prettyman,
he feared to stay, and dared not fly. If he could have forgotten the
danger he apprehended, his good natured friend by the studied
exaggerations in which he was continually clothing it, would have
perfectly succeed in refreshing his memory. But in reality it was never
absent from his thoughts. His slumbers were short and disturbed. And he
could scarcely close his eyes, ere the enraged lord Martin, with his sword
drawn, and his countenance flaming with inexorable fury, presented himself
to his affrighted imagination.

At length sir William by his generous interposition affected a compromise.
It was agreed that Mr. Prettyman should fall upon his knees before lord
Martin in the public room in the presence of Delia, and, asking his
pardon, put a small cane into his hand. "My lord," said sir William to the
beau, "is as generous as he is brave. He will not make an improper use of
the advantage you put into his hands. He will raise you from the humble
posture you will have assumed, and, embracing you cordially, all that is
past will be forgotten. As his lordship will take you under his
protection, not an individual will dare to reflect upon you." "Mr.
Prettyman," said sir William to lord Martin, "unites the heart of a
chicken to the most absolute skill in the small sword that ever I saw. I
have been only capable of restraining him by representing your lordship as
the most furious and impracticable of mankind. If he once suspect that I
have misrepresented you, a duel, in which I am afraid your lordship would
be overmatched, must be the inevitable consequence. Might I therefore
presume to advise, your lordship should make use of the advantage I have
gained you without mercy."




CHAPTER VI.

_Containing some Specimens of Heroism._


The evening now approached, in which the scene sir William Twyford had
with so much pains prepared, was to be acted. An imperfect rumour had
spread that something extraordinary was to pass in the public room. Miss
Prim was of opinion that a duel would be fought. "I shall be frightened
out of my wits," said she. "But I must go, for one loves any thing new,
and I believe there is nothing in it that a modest woman may not see."
Miss Gawky thought it would be a boxing match. "Bless us, my dear lord
Martin could stand no chance with that great lubberly macaroni." But Miss
Griskin, with a look of more than common sagacity, assured the ladies that
she had penetrated to the very bottom of the matter. "Mr. Prettyman and
lord Martin have ordered two large rounds of beef to be set upon the table
at supper, and they mean to lay about them for a wager."

In this manner every one made her own conjecture, which she preferred to
that of all the rest. Curiosity was wrought up to the highest pitch, and
the uncertainty that prevailed upon the subject, rendered the affair still
more interesting. The rooms were early filled with an uncommon number of
spectators. About nine o'clock Mr. Prettyman entered, but instead of
exerting himself with his usual vivacity, he retired to one corner of the
room, and sat in a sheepish and melancholy posture. Not long after, sir
William Twyford and lord Martin came in, arm in arm.

The peer strutted immediately to the upper end of the room. Delia stood
near him. "My lovely girl," said he, with an air of vulgar familiarity, "I
am rejoiced to see you. I hope I shall one day prove myself worthy of your
favour."

While this passed Mr. Prettyman was by no means in an enviable condition.
From the operation of fear and vexation he perspired very profusely.
Vanity, as we have said, might almost be termed his ruling passion, and he
would never have sacrificed it so publicly to any consideration less
immediate than that of personal safety. Ardently did he long to have the
terrible scene concluded. But he had neither strength nor spirits to
advance a step, or even to rise from his seat.

Sir William Twyford now came up to him, and took hold of his hand. "My
dear friend," said he, "be not dispirited. It is no more than a flea-bite,
and it will be over in a moment. You will acquire the friendship of the
first personage in the county, and far from losing any thing in the public
esteem, you will be more respected than ever." "_Morbleu_," cried the
beau, "my shoulders ake for it already. But, _mon très cher & très
excellent ami_, do not desert me, and remind the peer of the generosity
you talked of."

Sir William now raised him from his seat, and led him to the middle of the
room. Lord Martin, with a stately air, advanced a few steps. In spite
however of all the heroism he could assume, as the important affair drew
towards a crisis, he began to tremble. Mr. Prettyman fell upon his knees,
and sir William put a cane into his hand. But in this posture the beau
remained still somewhat taller than his antagonist. "Most worthy lord,"
cried he in a tremulous voice, "I am truly sorry for the misunderstanding
that has happened, and I am filled with the most ardent"----While he was
yet speaking he advanced the cane in the attitude of presenting it.
"Villain," said lord Martin, who between fear and rage could no longer
contain himself, and snatched it from his hand. But he could scarcely
reach beyond the shoulder of his enemy, and blinded with emotion and
exertion, instead of directing his blows as he ought to have done, he
struck him two or three very severe strokes on the head and face. The beau
bore it as long as he could. But at length bellowing out, "_Mon Dîeu, je
suis meurtriè_, I am beaten to a jelly," he rose from his knees. His
antagonist being between him and the door, he fairly threw him upon his
back, and flying out of the room he stopped not till he arrived at the
inn, where, ordering his phaeton and six, he ascended without a moment's
pause, and drove off for London.

In the mean time, every thing in the public room was in confusion and
disorder. Sir William flew to support the discomfited hero, who had
received a grievous contusion in his shoulder. Miss Griskin giggled, the
other ladies screamed, and Miss Languish, as usual, fainted away. "Bless
me," cried Miss Fletcher, "it is the queerest affair"--"By my troth," said
Miss Gawky, "it is vastly fine." "But not half so fine," cried Miss
Griskin, "as the buttocks of beef."

By this time lord Martin had raised himself in a sitting posture and
uttered a deep groan. "Best of friends," said he, pressing the hand of sir
William, "tell me truly, am I victorious, or am I defeated?" "Oh
_victoria_!" cried sir William; "never heed a slight skin wound that
you received in the combat." His lordship stood up. "Damnation, pox
confound it!" said he, a little recovering himself, "what is become of the
rascal? I have not given him half what he deserved. But, ladies," added he
flourishing his cane, "it is my maxim, as I am strong to be merciful."

Saying this, he advanced towards Delia, and, with a flourish of importance
and conceit, laid the weapon, which he had so roundly employed, at her
feet. "Loveliest of women," said he, "to your shrine I devote myself. Upon
your altar, I lay the insignia of my prowess. Deign, gentlest of thy sex,
to accept thus publicly of those sighs which I have long poured forth upon
thy account."

Delia, though the native modesty of her character caused her whole face to
be suffused with blushes at having the eyes of the whole company thus
turned upon her, regarded the peer with a look of ineffable disdain, and
turned from him in silence.

Such were the transactions of an evening, which will doubtless long be
remembered by such as had the good fortune to be spectators. The natural
impertinence and insolence of lord Martin were swelled by the event to ten
times their natural pitch. He crowed like a cock, and cackled like a
goose. The vulgar of the other sex, who are constantly the admirers of
success, however unmerited, and conceit, however unfounded, thought his
lordship the greatest man in the world. The inequality of his legs was
removed by the proof he had exhibited of his prowess. The inequality of
his shoulders was hid under a rent-roll of ten thousand a year. And the
narrowness of his intellects, the optics of these connoisseurs were not
calculated to discern.

The peer, as we have already hinted, was the suitor most favoured by the
father of our heroine. The principal passion of the old gentleman was the
love of money. But at the same time he was not absolutely incapable of
relishing the inferior charms of a venerable title and a splendid
reputation. Perceiving that his client continually rose in the public
opinion, he was more eager than ever to have the match concluded. Lord
Martin, though his organs were not formed to delight in beauty at the
first hand, was yet tickled with the conceit of carrying off so fair a
prize from the midst of a thousand gaping expectants.

It will naturally be imagined that the situation of Delia at this moment
was by no means an enviable one. She was caught in the snares of love. And
the more she struggled to get free, she was only the more limed and
entangled. The recollection of the hopelessness of her love by no means
sufficed to destroy it. The recollection of her former carelessness and
gaiety was not able to restore her to present ease. In vain she summoned
pride and maiden dignity to support her. In vain she formed resolutions,
which were broken as soon as made. Every where she was haunted by the
image of her dear unknown. Her nights were sleepless and uneasy. The fire
and brightness of her eyes were tarnished. _She pined in green and
yellow melancholy._

The more dear were the ideal image that accompanied her, the more did she
execrate and detest her persecutor. "No," cried she, "I will never be his.
Never shall the sacred tie, which should only unite congenial spirits, be
violated by two souls, distant as the poles, jarring as contending
elements. My father may kill me. Alas, of what value is life to me! It is
a long scene of unvaried misfortune. It is a dreary vista of despair. He
may kill me, but never, never shall he force me to a deed my soul abhors."




CHAPTER VII.

_Containing that with which the reader will be acquainted when he has
read it_.


The cup of misfortune, by which it was decreed that the virtue and the
constancy of our heroine should be tried, was not yet ended. The
disposition of a melancholy lover is in the utmost degree variable. Now
the fair Delia studiously sought to plunge herself in impervious solitude;
and now, worn with a train of gloomy reflections, she with equal eagerness
solicited the society of her favourite companion.

By this time sir William Twyford and Miss Fletcher were become in a manner
inseparable. Of consequence the company of the one necessarily involved
that of the other. And the gaiety and good humour of sir William, tempered
as they were by an excellent understanding, and an unaffected vein of
sportive wit, were the sweetest medicine to the wounded heart of Delia.
When she had first chosen Miss Fletcher for her intimate friend, her own
faculties had not yet reached their maturity; and habit frequently renders
the most insipid amusements pleasurable and interesting. Southampton
itself did not afford the largest scope for selection. And however our
readers may decide respecting the merit of the easy, the voluble and the
good humoured Miss Fletcher, they will scarcely be disposed to deny that
of all the female characters we have hitherto exhibited, she was the most
amiable.

One evening, as these three friends were sitting together, sir William
took occasion to lament the necessity that was laid upon him to quit
Southampton for a few days, though he hoped very speedily to be able to
return. His inamorata, as usual, was very inquisitive to learn the
business that was to deprive her for a time of the presence of a lover, of
whom she was not a little ostentatious. Sir William answered that he was
under an engagement to be present at the marriage of one of his college
friends, and that he should set out in company with Mr. Moreland.

At that name our tender and apprehensive fair one involuntarily started.
"Mr. Moreland!" said she to herself, "Ah, it was at his house that my
unknown resided. It is very seldom that Mr. Moreland undertakes a journey.
Surely there must be something particularly interesting to him in the
affair. The strange combination of circumstances terrifies and perplexes
me. Would I were delivered from this state of uncertainty! Would to God I
were dead!"

The uncertainty which afflicted her was however of a very short duration.
Miss Fletcher, by an inexhaustible train of interrogatories, led sir
William to relate by degrees every thing he knew of the affair. The young
gentleman his friend was the nephew and heir of Mr. Moreland. The present
match had been long upon the carpet, and was a very considerable one in
point of fortune. "Did the nephew ever visit Mr. Moreland?" "Very
frequently," said sir William. "And he is visited" interposed Delia, "by
other young gentlemen from the university?" "No," answered sir William.
"Mr. Moreland, who is an old batchelor, full of oddities and sensibility,
has a general dislike of young collegians. He thinks them pert, dissolute,
arrogant, and pedantic. He therefore never receives any but his nephew,
for whom he has the most ardent affection, and sometimes by particular
grace myself who am his intimate friend." "And how long is it since the
young gentleman paid a visit to his uncle?" Sir William looked a little
surprized at so particular a question, but answered: "He was here not
above a fortnight ago to invite his uncle to the wedding. But he is rather
serious and thoughtful in his temper, so that he is seldom seen in
public."

It was now but too certain that the friend of sir William, and the amiable
unknown, who had made a conquest of the heart of Delia, were the same
person. The surprise at which she was taken, and the unwelcome manner in
which her doubts were now at once resolved, were too much for the delicate
frame of our heroine. She sat for a moment gazing with an eager and
unmeaning stare upon the face of sir William. But she presently
recollected herself, and, bursting out of the room, flew to her chamber in
the same instant, and was relieved by a flood of tears.

Sir William was inexpressibly surprised at this incident. Delia, he was
sure, did not even know the name of his friend, and he could scarcely
imagine that she had ever seen him. Miss Fletcher, though considerably
astonished herself, gave sir William an account of so many particulars of
what had passed between his friend and our heroine, as were perfectly
sufficient to solve the difficulty. In return the baronet explained to her
the exact situation of the affair of Damon, told her that he did not
believe the day was yet fixed, and assured her that Mr. Moreland and
himself waited for a farther summons, though it must be confessed that it
was expected every hour.

These particulars, when communicated to Delia by the indefatigable
assiduity of Miss Fletcher, afforded her but a very slender consolation.
"What avails it me," said she, "that the day is not fixed? Every
considerable circumstance, there is reason to believe, is determined. He
marries, with the approbation of all his friends, a lady, my superior in
rank and fortune, and who is probably every way worthy of him. Ah, why am
I thus selfish and envious? No, let me pine away in obscurity, let me be
forgotten. But may he live long and happy. Did he not tell me, that he
went to seek the _mistress of his fate_?--And yet," interrupted she,
"he accompanied the information with words of such sweet import, with so
much tenderness and gentleness, as will never be erased from my mind. Ah
foolish girl, wilt thou for ever delude thyself, wilt thou be for ever
extracting comfort from despair? No! Long enough hast thou been misguided
by the meteor of hope. Long enough hast thou been cheated by the visions
of youthful fancy. There is now no remedy left. Let me die."

There were two passions that predominated in the breast of sir William
Twyford. The first was that of a humourist, and to this almost every other
object was occasionally sacrificed. But he had likewise a large fund of
good nature. He perceived, that in two successive instances, however
unintentionally, his conduct had been the source of unhappiness to the
most amiable of her sex. The victory of lord Martin had put it more than
ever in his power to harrass Delia. She was incessantly importuned, now by
her father, and now by her inamorato. And her distress, if it had wanted
any addition, was rendered compleat by the expected marriage of one, whose
personal accomplishments had caught her unwary heart. He lamented the
undeserved misfortune of youth and beauty. His heart bled for her.

Thus circumstanced, his active benevolence determined him not to lose a
moment, in endeavouring to repair the mischief of which he had so
unfortunately been the author. He had never cordially approved of the
intended union between his friend and Miss Frampton. She was of the first
order of coquettes, and it might have puzzled even an anatomist to
determine, whether she had a heart. Descartes informs us that the soul
usually resides in the pineal gland, but the soul of this lady seemed to
inhabit in her eyes. She had been caught with the figure of Damon. And had
a figure more perfectly beautiful, if that had been possible, or an
equipage more brilliant, presented itself, he did not doubt but that it
would carry away the prize.

Miss Frampton was heiress to a fortune of fifty thousand pounds. The
father of Damon, whose soul, in union with some amiable qualities, which
served him for a disguise, had the misfortune to be exceedingly mercenary
at the bottom, had proposed the match to his son. Damon, who had never in
his life been guilty of an act of disobedience, received the
recommendation of his father with a prejudice in its favour. He waited
upon the young lady and found her beautiful, high spirited, accomplished,
and incensed by a thousand worshippers. Her disposition was not indeed
congenial to his own. But he was prejudiced by filial duty, dazzled by her
charms, and led on insensibly by the mildness and pliableness of his
character. In a word, every thing had been concluded, and the wedding was
daily expected to take place.




CHAPTER VIII.

_Two Persons of Fashion_.


In pursuance of the determination he had formed, sir William immediately
set out for Oxford, where his friend still resided. As he had lived with
him upon terms of the most unreserved familiarity, he made use of the
liberty of an intimate, and, without being announced, abruptly entered his
chamber. Damon was sitting in a melancholy posture, his countenance
dejected, and his eye languid. Upon the entrance of the baronet he looked
up, and struck with the sudden appearance of one to whom he was so
ardently attached, his visage for a moment assumed an air of gaiety and
pleasure.

"Ha," cried sir William, with his wonted spriteliness of accent, "methinks
the countenance of my Damon does not bespeak the sentiments that become a
bridegroom." "I am afraid not," answered Damon. "But tell me to what am I
indebted for this agreeable and unexpected visit?" "We will talk of that
another time. But when did you see my play-fellow, Miss Frampton?" "I have
not seen her," replied our hero with a sigh half uttered, and half
suppressed, "these ten days." "What" cried the baronet, "no
misunderstanding, eh?" "Not absolutely that. I saw her, I fear, without
all the rapture that becomes a lover, and she resented it with a coldness
that did not introduce an immediate explanation. Since that time I have
been somewhat indisposed, or probably affairs would now have been
settled." "And what," said sir William, "must we apply the old maxim, that
the falling out of lovers is the consolidating of love?"

Damon from the entrance of his friend had appeared a good deal agitated.
He was no longer able to contain himself. He eagerly seized the hand of
sir William and clasped it between both of his. "My dear baronet, I have
never concealed from you a thought of my heart. But my present situation
is so peculiarly delicate and distressing, that I can scarcely form any
sentiment of it, or even dare trust myself to recollect it. I have seen,"
continued he, "ah, that I could forget it! a woman, beauteous as the day,
before whom the charms of Miss Frampton disappear, as, before the rising
sun, each little star _hides its diminish'd head_. Her features, full
of sensibility, her voice such as to thrill the soul and all she says,
pervaded with wit and good sense." "And where," cried the baronet, in a
lively tone, "resides this peerless she?"

"Alas," answered the disconsolate Damon, "it matters not. I shall see her
no more. Virtue, honour, every thing forbids it. I may be unhappy, but I
will never deserve to be so. Miss Frampton has my vows. Filial duty calls
on me to fulfil them. Obstacles without number, Alps on Alps arise, to
impede my prosecution of a fond and unlicensed inclination. The struggle
has cost me something, but it is over. I have recovered my health, I have
formed my resolution. This very day, (you, my good friend, will accept the
apology) I had determined to repair to Beaufort Place. Doubt and
uncertainty nourish the lingering distemper that would undo me. I will
come to a decision."

Sir William was not of a temper to abdicate any affair in which he had
embarked, before success appeared absolutely unattainable. Like Caesar, it
was enough for him that the thing appeared possible to be done, to engage
him to persevere. He therefore begged leave to accompany his friend, and
they set out together that very afternoon.

Beaufort Place, the habitation of Miss Frampton, was only six miles from
Oxford. And, as he knew that Sir Harry Eustace, the son of that lady's
mother by a second husband, was now upon a visit to his sister, sir
William Twyford made no scruple of proceeding with his friend immediately
to the house.

After a short general conversation, sir William drew the young baronet
into the garden. In the mean time sir Harry's chariot was preparing, as he
had fixed the conclusion of his visit for that evening. After an interval
of half an hour the servant brought word that the carriage was ready. Sir
Harry, who was a young man of little ceremony, bowed _en passant_
before the parlour window, and immediately hurried away.

Sir William stood for some time at the door of the house after sir Harry
had driven away. Presently he observed another carriage advancing by the
opposite road. The liveries were flaunting and the attendants numerous.
They drew nearer, and he perceived that it was the equipage of lord
Osborne. Since therefore the lovers were to be so soon interrupted by the
entrance of a new visitant, he thought proper immediately to enter the
parlour.

He had only time to remark the air and countenance of Damon and the young
lady. They appeared mutually cold and embarassed. He could trace in his
friend the aukwardness and timidity of one who was unused to act a studied
part. Miss Frampton, with a countenance uninterested and inattentive,
affected the carriage of a person who thought herself insulted.

Lord Osborne was now announced. He was a young nobleman, that had spent a
considerable part of his fortune upon the continent. With a narrow
understanding and a contracted heart, he had been able by habitual cunning
and invincible effrontery, to acquire the reputation of a man of parts.
Courage was the only respectable quality, his possession of which could
not be questioned. He was a debauchee and a gamester. There was no
meanness he had not practised, there was no villainy of which he could not
boast. With this character, he was universally respected and courted by
all such as wished to acquire the reputation of men of gaiety and spirit.
The ladies were all dying for him, as for a man who had ruined more
innocence, and occasioned a greater consumption of misery, than any other
man in the kingdom.

The face of Miss Frampton visibly brightened the moment his name was
articulated. She was all spirits and agitation, though she seemed to feel
something aukward in her situation. When he entered the room, she flew
half way to meet him, but, suddenly recollecting herself, stopt short. "My
dear Miss Frampton," said his lordship, with a familiar and indifferent
air, "I cannot stop a moment. I am mortified to death. The most
unfortunate man! But I could not live a whole day without seeing you.
Believe me to be more impassioned, more ardent than ever." Saying this be
directed a slight glance and a half bow towards our two friends. "Farewel,
my charmer, my adorable!" said he, and kissed her hand. Miss Frampton
struck him a slight blow with her fan, and crying, with an easy wink,
"Remember!" she dropt him a profound curtesey and his lordship departed.

For a moment the whole company was silent. "By my soul," exclaimed sir
William, "this is the most singular affair!" "Oh, nothing at all,"
answered the young lady. "It is all _à la mode de Paris_. In France
no man of fashion can presume to accost a lady, whether young or old, but
in the language of love. But it means no more, than when a minister of
state says to his first clerk, _your humble servant_, or to the widow
of a poor seaman, _your devoted slave_." "Oh," cried sir William, "that
is all. And by my faith, it is mighty pretty. What think you Damon? I
hope, when you are married, you will have no objection to lord Osborne, or
any other person of fashion making love to your wife before your face."
"What an indelicate question!" said Miss Frampton. "I declare, baronet,
you are grown an absolute boor. Nobody ever talks of marriage now. A woman
of fashion blushes to hear it mentioned before a third person." "Why, to
say the truth, madam, I have been honoured with so great an intimacy by
Damon, that I thought that might excuse the impropriety. And now, pray
your ladyship, must I wait till we are alone, before I ask my friend
whether his happy day be fixed?" "Since you will talk," said Miss
Frampton, "of the odious subject, I believe I may tell you that it is not.
We are in no such hurry." "My dear sweet play-fellow," said the baronet,
"I must tell you once for all that I am no adept in French fashions. So
that you will give me leave to use the unceremonious language of an
Englishman. My friend here, you know, is a little sheepish, but I have
words at will. I thought matters had been nearer a termination." "And
pray, my good sir, let the gentleman speak for himself. If he is not
dissatisfied, why should you be in such haste?" "Indeed, madam,"
interposed Damon, "I am not perfectly satisfied. Perhaps indeed a lover
ought to think himself happy enough in being permitted to dance attendance
upon a lady of your charms. But I once thought, madam, that we had
advanced somewhat farther." "I cannot tell," answered the lady with an air
of levity. "Just as you please. But I cannot see why we should put
ourselves to any inconvenience. Lord Osborne"--"Lord Osborne!" interrupted
sir William with some warmth, "and pray what has his lordship to do with
the matter?" "Really sir William," replied Miss Frampton, "you are very
free. But his lordship is my friend, and I hope Damon has no objection to
his continuing so." "Look you," answered sir William, "I would neither
have lord Osborne for the rival of Damon now, nor for your
_chichisbee_ hereafter." "And yet I am not sure," cried she, "that he
may not be both." "Is there then," said the baronet, "no engagement
subsisting between you and Damon?" "I believe," cried Miss Frampton, a
little hesitating, "there may be something of the kind. But we may change
our minds you know, and I do not think that I shall prosecute upon it. Ha!
ha! ha!" "To say the truth," replied sir William, "I believe lord Osborne
is not only the rival of Damon, but a very formidable one too. But let me
tell you, Bella, a character so respectable as that of my friend, and so
true an Englishman, must not be allowed to dance attendance." "As he
pleases. I believe we understand one another. And to say the truth at
once, perhaps some time hence I may have no aversion to lord Osborne."

The reader will not suppose that the conversation continued much longer.
Damon and the young lady came to a perfect understanding, and parted
without any very ungovernable desire of seeing each other again. And thus
by the gay humour and active friendship of sir William Twyford, an affair
was happily terminated, which, from the timidity and gentleness of our
hero, might otherwise have lingered several months to the mutual
dissatisfaction of both parties. Damon quitted the house in raptures, and
was no sooner seated in the chariot, than he pressed his friend repeatedly
to his breast, and committed a thousand extravagancies of joy.




CHAPTER IX.

_A tragical Resolution._


Damon and his friend spent the evening together in the chambers of our
hero. They now discussed a variety of those subjects, which naturally
arise between friends who have been for any time separated. Damon threw
aside that reserve which the consciousness of a fault had hitherto
involuntarily imposed upon him, and related more explicitly who the lady
was of whom he was so much enamoured, and in what manner he had first seen
her. Recollecting that the baronet was just returned from the environs of
Southampton, he eagerly enquired into the health and situation of his
mistress.

Sir William related to him the adventure of Mr. Prettyman, as we have
already stated it to our readers, and deeply lamented the persecution to
which Delia was subjected from the haughty victor. "And is there," cried
Damon eagerly, "no prospect of his lordship's success?" "I believe,"
answered sir William, "that he is of all men her mortal aversion." "And is
there no happy lover in all her train, that she regards with a partial
eye?" "None," replied the baronet, "she is chaste as snow, and firm as
mountain oaks." "Propitious coldness!" exclaimed Damon, "for that may
heaven send down a thousand blessings on her head!"

"But you talked," added he, "of some occasion of your journey which you
deferred relating to me." "The occasion," answered sir William, determined
to preserve inviolate the secret of Delia, "is already fulfilled. I heard
from young Eustace of the appearance and addresses of Osborne, and
suspecting the rest, I determined to deliver you from the clutches of a
girl whom I always thought unworthy of you. And now" added he cheerfully,
"free as the winds, we can pursue uncontrolled the devices of our own
hearts."

The next morning the two friends proceeded to the house of lord Thomas
Villiers, the father of Damon. He had already learned something of the
visits of lord Osborne at Beaufort Place. He was not therefore much
surprised to hear of the scene, which had passed between his son and the
lady of that mansion. But there was something more to be done, in order to
gain the approbation of the father to the new project, in the prosecution
of which both these friends were equally sanguine.

Lord Thomas Villiers was, as we have already said, avaricious. He was not
therefore much pleased with the proposal of a match with a lady, whose
fortune was not the half of that of Miss Frampton. He was tinctured with
the pride of family, and he could not patiently think for a moment, of
marrying his only son to the daughter of a tradesman. Sir William employed
all his eloquence, and accommodated himself with infinite dexterity to the
humours of the person with whom he had to deal. Damon indeed said but
little, but his looks expressed more, than the baronet, with all his
abilities, and all his friendship, was able to suggest. In spite of both,
the father continued inexorable.

The mind of Damon was impressed with the most exalted ideas upon the
subject of filial duty. Had his heart been pre-engaged, before the affair
of Miss Frampton was proposed to him, he might not perhaps have carried
his complaisance so far, as to have married the indifferent person, in
spite of all his views and all his prepossessions. But in his estimate,
the actual entering into a connection for life in opposition to the will
of a parent, was a mode of conduct very different from, and far more
exceptionable than the refusing to unite oneself with a person in whose
society one had not the smallest reason to look for happiness.

There was another inducement that had much weight with Damon, and even
with his more sanguine friend, sir William Twyford. The fortune neither of
Damon nor Delia was independent. Lord Thomas Villiers was filled with too
many prepossessions and too much pride, easily to retract an opinion he
had once adopted, or to forgive an opposition to his judgment. The narrow
education of a tradesman it was natural to suppose had rendered the mind
of Mr. Hartley still more tenacious, and unmanageable. And neither would
sir William have been willing to see his friend, nor would the lover
readily have involved his mistress in circumstances of pecuniary distress.

The resolution of Damon was therefore speedily taken. Every motive that
could have weight, served to counteract the bias of his inclination. He by
no means wanted either firmness or spirit. He resolved to struggle, nor to
cease his efforts till he had conquered. With this design he entreated,
and, after some difficulties, obtained of his father leave to enter
himself in the army, and to make a campaign in America.

The character of his heart seemed particularly formed for military
pursuits. He was grave and thoughtful, he was generous and humane. To a
mind contemplative and full of sensibility, he united a temper, frank,
open, and undisguised. He was usually mild, gentle and pliant. But in a
situation, that called for determination and spirit, it was impossible to
appear more bold and manly, more cool and decided,--Affectionate was the
farewel of his father, and still more affectionate that of his friend.
Damon, though he endeavoured to summon all his resolution, could not
restrain a sigh when he considered himself as about to sail for distant
climates, and recollected, that probably, before his return, his beloved
mistress, _dearer than life and all its joys_, would be united,
irrevocably united to another. But here we must take leave of our hero,
and return to his fair inamorata.



DAMON

AND

DELIA.



PART the SECOND.





DAMON

AND

DELIA.

PART the SECOND.


CHAPTER I.

_In which the Story begins over again_.


Sir William Twyford had taken care to inform Miss Fletcher, and by her
means Delia herself, of every circumstance as it occurred. Delia was
indeed flattered by the breach that had taken place with Miss Frampton,
and the perfect elucidation, which the story of this lady afforded to the
most enigmatical expressions of Damon, in the interesting scene that had
passed between them in the alcove. She no longer doubted of the reality of
his attachment. Her heart was soothed, and her pride secretly flattered,
in recollecting that she had not suffered herself to be caught by one who
was perfectly indifferent to her.

But the information that stifled all her hopes, and gave her the prospect
of so long, and, too probably, an eternal absence, sat heavy upon her
spirits, and preyed upon her delicate constitution. From the persecutions
of lord Martin she had no respite. Her eye grew languid, the colour faded
in her damask cheek, and her health visibly decayed.

At this time Miss Fletcher proposed a journey to Windsor and other places,
and intreated to have her friend to accompany her. Mr. Hartley, with all
his foibles, was much attached to his only child, and deeply afflicted
with the alteration he perceived in her. He readily therefore gave his
consent to the proposed jaunt. "When she returns, it will be time enough,"
said he to lord Martin, "to bring things to the conclusion, so much
desired by both of us. I will not put my darling into your hands, but with
that health and gaiety, which have so long been the solace of my old age,
and which cannot fail to make any man happy that deserves her."

Delia set out without any other inclination, than to escape from
intreaties that were become in the highest degree disagreeable to her. She
was addressed no longer upon a topic, of which she wished never to hear.
Her eye was no longer wounded with the sight of her insolent admirer. This
had an immediate and a favourable effect upon her. The conversation of
Miss Fletcher was lively and unflagging, and the simplicity of her remarks
proved an inexhaustible source of entertainment to our heroine.

They travelled leisurely and visited a variety of parks and seats of
noblemen which lay in their way. The taste of Delia was delicate and
refined. A continual succession of objects; gardens, architecture,
pictures and statues soothed her spirits, and gradually restored her to
that gaiety and easiness of temper, which had long rendered her the most
lovely and engaging of her sex.

At length they arrived at Windsor. The simple dignity of the castle, its
commanding situation, and the beautiful effects of the river from below,
rendered it infinitely the most charming spot our heroine had yet seen.
Her spirits were on the wing, she was all life and conversation, and the
most constant heart, that nature had ever produced, for a moment, forgot
her hopes, her fears, her inclinations, and her Damon.

She was now standing at a window that commanded the terrace. The evening
was beautiful, and the walk crouded. There were assembled persons of all
sexes and of different ranks. All appeared gaiety and splendour. The
supple courtier and the haughty country gentleman seemed equally at their
ease. There was thoughtless youth and narrative old age. The company
passed along, and object succeeded object without intermission.

One of the last that caught the eye of Delia, was that of two gentlemen
walking arm in arm, and seeming more grave than the rest of the company.
They were both tall and well shaped; but one of them had somewhat more
graceful and unembarrassed in his manner than the other. The latter was
dressed in black, the former in colours, with much propriety and elegance.

As they turned at the end of the walk the eye of Delia caught in the
latter the figure of Damon. She was inexpressibly astonished, she trembled
in every limb, and could scarcely support herself to a seat. Miss Fletcher
had caught the same object at the same moment, and, though she probably
might not otherwise have been clear in her recollection, the disorder of
Delia put her conjecture out of doubt. She therefore, before our heroine
had time to recollect herself, dispatched her brother, who had attended
them in their journey, to inform Damon that a lady in the castle was
desirous to speak with him.

In an instant our hero and his companion, escorted by young Fletcher,
entered the room. The astonishment of Damon, at being so suddenly
introduced to a person, whom he had never expected to see again, was
immeasurable. He rushed forward with a kind of rapture; he suddenly
recollected himself; but at length advanced with hesitation. There was no
one present beside those we have already named. The castle was probably
familiar to every person except Delia and her companions. Every one beside
was therefore assembled upon the terrace.

Our heroine now gradually recovered from the disorder into which the
unexpected sight of Damon had thrown her. She was much surprised at
looking up to find him in her presence. "How is this," cried she, "how
came you hither?" "The meeting," said our hero, "is equally unexpected to
us both. But, ah, my charmer, whence this disorder? Why did you tremble,
why look so pale?" "Oh goodness," cried Miss Fletcher, "what should it be?
Why it was nothing in all the world, but her seeing you just now from the
window." "And were you," cried Damon eagerly, "so kind as to summon me to
your presence?" "No, no, my good sir," said the lively lady, "you must
thank me for that". "How then at least," said the lover, "must I interpret
your disorder?"

Delia was inexpressibly confused at the inconsiderate language of her
companion. "I cannot tell," said she, "you must not ask me. You must
forget it." "And can I," cried Damon with transport, "ever forget a
disorder so propitious, so flattering? Can I hope that the heart of my
charmer is not indifferent to her Damon!" "Oh sir, be silent. Do not use a
language like this." "Alas," cried he, "too long has my passion been
suppressed. Too long have I been obliged to act a studied part, and employ
a language foreign to my heart." "I thought," answered Delia, with
hesitation, "that you were going to leave the kingdom." "And did my fair
one condescend to employ a thought upon me? Did she interest herself in my
concern and enquire after my welfare? And how so soon could she have
learned my intention?"

This question, joined with the preceding circumstances, completed the
confusion of Delia. She blushed, stammered, and was silent. Damon, during
this interval, gazed upon her with unmingled rapture. Every symptom she
betrayed of confusion, was to him a symptom of something inexpressibly
soothing. "Ah," whispered he to himself, "I am beloved, and can I then
leave the kingdom? Can I quit this inestimable treasure? Can I slight so
pure a friendship, and throw away the jewel upon which all my future
happiness depends?"

The conversation, from the peculiar circumstances of the lovers, had so
immediately become interesting, that the gentlemen had not had an
opportunity of quitting them. During the short silence that prevailed the
friend of Damon took young Fletcher by the hand, and led him into the
garden. The lovers were now under less restraint. Delia, perceiving that
she could no longer conceal her sentiments, confessed them with ingenuous
modesty. Damon on the other hand was ravished at so unexpected a
discovery, and in a few minutes had lived an age in love.

He now began to recollect himself. "Where," said he, "are all my
resolutions? What are become of all the plans I had formed, and the
designs in which I had embarked? What an unexpected revolution? No," said
he, addressing himself to Delia, "I will never quit you. Do thou but
smile, and let all the world beside abandon me. Can you forgive the
sacrilegious intention of deserting you, of flying from you to the
extremities of the globe? Oh, had I known a thought of Damon had harboured
in one corner of your heart, I would sooner have died." "And do you
think," cried Delia, "that I will tempt you to disobedience? No. Obey the
precepts of your father and your own better thoughts. Heaven designed us
not for each other. Neither your friends nor mine can ever be reconciled
to the union. Go then and forget me. Go and be happy. May your sails be
swelled with propitious gales! May victory and renown attend your steps!"
"Ah cruel Delia, and do you wish to banish me? Do you enjoin upon me the
impracticable talk, to forget all that my heart holds dear? And will my
Delia resign herself to the arms of a more favoured lover?" "Never," cried
she with warmth. "I will not disobey my father. I will not marry contrary
to his inclinations. But even the authority of a parent shall not drag me
to the altar with a man my soul detests." "Propitious sounds! Generous
engagements! Thus let me thank thee."--And he kissed her hand with
fervour. "Thus far," cried Delia, "I can advance. I employ no disguise. I
confess to you all my weakness. Perhaps I ought to blush. But never will I
have this reason to blush, for that my love has injured the object it
aspires to bless. Go in the path of fortune. Deserve success and happiness
by the exemplariness of your duty. And may heaven shower down blessings
without number!"




CHAPTER II.

_The History of Mr. Godfrey_.


In expostulations like these our lovers spent their time without coming to
any conclusion, till the evening and Miss Fletcher warned them that it was
time to depart. Damon was to proceed for London early the next morning. He
therefore intreated of Delia to permit his friend Mr. Godfrey, who was
obliged to continue in the place some days longer, to wait upon her with
his last commands. He informed himself of the time when she was to return
to Southampton, and he trusted to be there not long after her. In the mean
time, as his situation was at present very precarious, he prevailed upon
her to permit him to write to her from time to time, and to promise to
communicate to him in return any thing of consequence that might happen to
herself.

During the remainder of the evening Miss Fletcher made several ingenious
observations upon what had passed. Delia gently blamed her for having so
strangely occasioned the interview, though in reality she was by no means
displeased by the event it had produced. "Bless us, child, you are as
captious as any thing. Why I would not but have seen it for ever so much.
Well, he is a sweet dear man, and so kind, and so polite, for all the
world I think him just such another as Mr. Prattle. But then he is grave,
and makes such fine speeches, it does one's heart good to hear him. I vow
I wish I had such a lover. Sir William never says any thing half so
pretty. Bless us, my dear, _he_ talks about love, just as if he were
talking about any thing else."

The next morning after breakfast, Mr. Godfrey appeared. He brought from
Damon a thousand vows full of passion and constancy. He had parted, he
said, more determined not to leave England, more resolute to prosecute his
love than ever.

Having discharged his commission, he offered his service to escort the
ladies in any party they might propose for the present day. He said, that
being perfectly acquainted with Windsor and its environs, he flattered
himself he might be able to contribute to their entertainment. The very
gallant manner in which this offer was made, determined Miss Fletcher, as
something singular and interesting in the appearance of Mr. Godfrey did
our heroine, cheerfully to close with the proposal.

The person of Mr. Godfrey as we have already said was tall and genteel.
There was a diffidence in his manner, that seemed to prove that he had not
possessed the most extensive acquaintance with high life; but he had a
natural politeness that amply compensated for the polish and forms of
society. His air was serious and somewhat melancholy; but there was a fire
and animation in his eye that was in the highest degree striking.

Delia engaged him to talk of the character and qualities of Damon. Upon
this subject, Mr. Godfrey spoke with the warmth of an honest friendship.
He represented Damon as of a disposition perfectly singular and
unaccommodated to what he stiled "the debauched and unfeeling manners of
the age." He acknowledged with readiness and gratitude, that he owed to
him the most important obligations. By degrees Delia collected from him
several circumstances of a story, which she before apprehended to be
interesting. She observed, that, as he shook off the embarrassment of a
first introduction, his language became fluent, elegant, pointed, and even
sometimes poetical. Since however he related his own story imperfectly and
by piece meal, we shall beg leave to state it in our own manner. And we
the rather do it, as we apprehend it to be interesting in itself, and as
we foresee that he will make a second appearance in the course of this
narrative. We will not however deprive our readers of the reflections he
threw out upon the several situations in which he had been placed. We will
give them without pretending to decide how far they may be considered as
just and well-founded.

Mr. Godfrey was not born to affluent circumstances. At a proper age he had
been placed at the university of Oxford, and here it was that he commenced
his acquaintance with Damon. At Oxford his abilities had been universally
admired. His public exercises, though public exercises by their very
nature ought to be dull, had in them many of those sallies, by which his
disposition was characterised, and much of that superiority, which he
indisputably possessed above his contemporaries. But though admired, he
was not courted. In our public places of education, a wide distance is
studiously preserved between young men of fortune, and young men that have
none. But Mr. Godfrey had a stiffness and unpliableness of temper, that
did not easily bend to the submission that was expected of him. He could
neither flatter a blockhead, nor pimp for a peer. He loved his friend
indeed with unbounded warmth, and it was impossible to surpass him in
generousness and liberality. But he had a proud integrity, that whispered
him, with, a language not to be controled, that he was the inferior of no
man.

He was destined for the profession of a divine, and, having finished his
studies, retired upon a curacy of forty pounds a year. His ambition was
grievously mortified at the obscurity in which he was plunged; and his
great talents, in spite of real modesty, forcibly convinced him, that this
was not the station for which nature had formed him. But he had an
enthusiasm of virtue, that led him for a time to overlook these
disadvantages. "I am going," said he, "to dwell among scenes of unvitiated
nature. I will form the peasant to generosity and sentiment. I will teach
laborious industry to look without envy and without asperity upon those
above them. I will be the friend and the father of the meanest of my
flock. I will give sweetness and beauty to the most rugged scenes. The
man, that banishes envy and introduces contentment; the man, that converts
the little circle in which he dwells into a terrestrial paradise, that
renders men innocent here, and happy for ever, may be obscure, may be
despised by the superciliousness of luxury; but it shall never be said
that he has been a blank in creation. The Supreme Being will regard him
with a complacency, which he will deny to kings, that oppress, and
conquerors, that destroy the work of his hands."

Such were the suggestions of youthful imagination. But Mr. Godfrey
presently found the truth of that maxim, as paradoxical as it is
indisputable, that the heart of man is naturally hard and unamiable. He
conducted himself in his new situation with the most unexceptionable
propriety, and the most generous benevolence. But there were men in his
audience, men who loved better to criticise, than to be amended; and
women, who felt more complacency in scandal, than eulogium. He displeased
the one by disappointing them; it was impossible to disappoint the other.
He laboured unremittedly, but his labours returned to him void. "And is it
for this," said he, "that I have sacrificed ambition, and buried talents?
Is humility to be rewarded only with mortification? Is obscurity and
retirement the favourite scene of uneasiness, ingratitude, and
impertinence? They shall be no longer my torment. In no scene can I meet
with a more scanty success."

He now obtained a recommendation to be private tutor to the children of a
nobleman. This nobleman was celebrated for the politeness of his manners
and the elegance of his taste. It was his boast and his ambition to be
considered as the patron of men of letters. With his prospect therefore in
this connection, Mr. Godfrey was perfectly satisfied. "I shall no longer,"
said he, "be the slave of ignorance, and the victim of insensibility. My
talents perhaps point me a step higher than to the business of forming the
minds of youth. But, at least, the youth under my care are destined to
fill the most conspicuous stations in future life. If propitious fortune
might have raised me to the character of a statesman; depressed by
adversity, I may yet have the honour of moulding the mind, and infusing
generosity into the heart, of a future statesman. I have heard the second
son of my patron celebrated for the early promises of capacity. To unfold
the springing germs of genius, to direct them in the path of general
happiness, is an employment by no means unworthy of a philosopher."

In this situation Mr. Godfrey however once more looked for pleasure, and
found disappointment. The nobleman had more the affectation of a patron,
than any real enthusiasm in the cause of literature. The abilities of Mr.
Godfrey were universally acknowledged. And so long as the novelty
remained, he was caressed, honoured, and distinguished. In a short time
however, he was completely forgotten by the patron, in the hurry of
dissipation, and the pursuits of an unbounded ambition. His eldest care
was universally confessed stupid and impracticable. And in the younger he
found nothing but the prating forwardness of a boy who had been flattered,
without sentiment, and without meaning. Her ladyship treated Mr. Godfrey
with superciliousness, as an intruder at her lord's table. The servants
caught the example, and showed him a distinction of neglect, which the
exquisiteness of his sensibility would not permit him to despise.

Mortified, irritated, depressed, he now quitted his task half finished and
threw himself upon the world. "The present age," said he, "is not an age
in which talents are overlooked, and genius depressed." He had heard much
of the affluence of writers, a Churchil, a Smollet, and a Goldsmith, who
had depended upon that only for their support. He saw the celebrated Dr.
Johnson caressed by all parties, and acknowledged to be second to no man,
whatever were his rank, however conspicuous his station. Full of these
ideas, he soon completed a production, fraught with the fire and
originality of genius, pointed in its remarks, and elegant in its style.
He had now to experience vexations, of which he had before entertained no
idea. He carried his work from bookseller to bookseller, and was every
where refused. His performance was not seasoned to the times, he was a
person that nobody knew, and he had no man of rank, by his importunities
and eloquence, to force him into the ranks of fashion. At length he found
a bookseller foolish enough to undertake it. But he presently perceived
that the gentlemen at the head of that profession were wiser than he. All
the motives they had mentioned, and one more, operated against him. The
monarchs of the critic realm scouted him with one voice, because his work,
was not written in the same cold, phlegmatic insupportable manner as their
own.

He had now advanced however too far to retreat. He had too much spirit to
resume either of those professions, which for reasons so cogent in his
opinion, he had already quitted. He wrote essays, squibs, and pamphlets
for an extemporary support. But though these were finished with infinite
rapidity, he found that they constituted a very precarious means of
subsistence. The time of dinner often came, before the production that was
to purchase it was completed; and when completed, it was frequently
several days before it could find a purchaser. And his copy money and his
taylor's bill were too little proportioned to one another.

He now recollected, what in the gaiety of hope he had forgotten, that
_many a flower_ only blows, with its sweetness to refresh the _air
of a desert_. He recollected many instances of works, raised by the
breath of fashion to the very pinnacle of reputation, that sunk as soon
again. He recollected instances scarcely fewer, of works, exquisite in
their composition, pregnant with beauties almost divine, that had passed
from the press without notice. Many had been revived by the cooler and
more deliberate judgment of a future age; and more had been lost for ever.
The instance of Chatterton, as a proof that the universal patronage of
genius was by no means the virtue of his contemporaries, flashed in his
face. And he looked forward to the same fate at no great distance, as his
own.

To Mr. Godfrey however, fortune was in one degree more propitious. Damon
was among the few whose judgment was not guided by the dictate of fashion.
Having met accidentally with the performance we have mentioned, he was
struck with its beauties. As he had heard nothing of it in the politest
circles, he concluded, with his usual penetration, that the author of it
was in obscure and narrow circumstances. _Open as day to sweet
humanity_, interested warmly in the fortune of the writer of so amiable
a performance, he flew to his bookseller's with the usual enquiries. The
bookseller stared, and had it not been for the splendour of his dress, and
his gilded chariot, would have been tempted to smile at so unfashionable
and absurd a question. He soon however obtained the information he
desired. And his eagerness was increased, when the name of Godfrey, and
the recollection of the talents by which he had been so eminently
distinguished, led him to apprehend that he was one, to whose abilities
and character he had been greatly attached.

He found some difficulty to obtain admission. But this was quickly
removed, as, from the dignity of his appearance, it was not probable that
he was a person, from whom Mr. Godfrey had any thing to apprehend. He
found him in a wretched apartment, his hair dishevelled and his dress
threadbare and neglected. Mr. Godfrey was unspeakably surprised at his
appearance. And it was with much difficulty that Damon prevailed upon him
to accept of an assistance, that he assured him should be but temporary,
if it were in the power of him, or any of his connections, to render him
respectable and independent, in such a situation as himself should chuse.

Disappointment and misfortune are calculated to inspire asperity into the
gentlest heart. Mr. Godfrey inveighed with warmth, and sometimes with
partiality, against the coldness and narrowness of the age. He said, "that
men of genius, in conspicuous stations, had no feeling for those whom
nature had made their brothers; and that those who had risen from
obscurity themselves, forgot the mortifications of their earlier life, and
did not imitate the generous justice which had enabled them to fulfil the
destination of nature." But though misfortune had taught him asperity upon
certain subjects, it had not corrupted his manners, debauched his
integrity, or narrowed his heart. He had still the same warmth in the
cause of virtue, as in days of the most unexperienced simplicity. He still
dreaded an oath, and reverenced the divinity of innocence. He still
believed in a God, and was sincerely attached to his honour, though he had
often been told, that this was a prejudice, unworthy of his comprehension
of thinking upon all other subjects.




CHAPTER III.

_A Misanthrope._


Such was the story, in its most essential circumstances, that Mr. Godfrey
related. Delia was exceedingly interested in the gaiety of his
imagination, the cruelty of his disappointments, and the acuteness, and
goodness of heart that appeared in his reflections. Miss Fletcher listened
to the whole with gaping wonder. But as soon as he was gone, she began
with her usual observations. "Well," said she, "I never saw an author
before. I could not have thought that he could have looked like a
gentleman. Why, I vow, I could sometimes have taken him for a beau. Ay,
but then he talked for all the world as if it had been written in a book.
Well, by my troth, it was a mighty pretty story. But I should have liked
it better, if there had been a sighing nymph, or a duel or two in it. But
do you think it was all of his own making?"

We will not trouble the reader to accompany our ladies from stage to stage
during the remainder of their journey. Nothing more remarkable happened,
and in ten days they arrived again at Southampton.

Damon met Mr. Moreland in London, and, with that simplicity and candour by
which he was distinguished, related to him every circumstance of his
story. Mr. Moreland had no predilection in favour of lord Thomas Villiers.
His sister, whom he esteemed in all respects an amiable woman, had by no
means lived happily with her husband. Avarice and pride of rank were the
farthest in the world from being the foibles of Mr. Moreland, and the
sensibility of his disposition did not permit him to treat the faults, to
which himself was a stranger, with much indulgence. He therefore
encouraged Damon to persevere in the pursuit of his inclination, and
invited him to return with him into the country. He promised himself to
propose the match to Mr. Hartley, and assured his nephew, that he should
never feel any narrowness in his circumstances, in case of his father's
displeasure, while it was in his power to render them affluent.

In pursuit of this plan, Damon, Mr. Moreland, and sir William Twyford,
whom they found in London, and whose goodness of humour led him heartily
to approve of the alteration in the plan of his friend, arrived, almost as
soon as our travellers, in the neighbourhood of Southampton. Sir William
and Damon, soon waited upon their respective mistresses, and in company so
mutually acceptable, time sped with a greater velocity than was usual to
him, and days appeared no more than hours.

It was impossible that such a connexion should pass long unnoticed. It
must be confessed however that it met with no interruption from lord
Martin. Perhaps it might have escaped his notice, though it escaped that
of no other person. Perhaps he was satiated with the glory he had
acquired, and having conquered one beau, would not, like Alexander, have
sighed, if there had remained no other beau to conquer. Perhaps the
countenance of Mr. Hartley, of which he considered himself as securer than
ever, led him, like a wise general, to reflect, that in staking his life
against that of a lover, whose chance of success was almost wholly
precluded, he mould make a very unfair and unequal combat.

Be this as it will, Mr. Hartley had no such motives to overlook this new
occurrence. Just however as he had begun to take it into his mature
consideration, he received the compliments of Mr. Moreland, with an
intimation of his design to make him a visit that very afternoon.

At this message Mr. Hartley was a good deal surprised. Mr. Moreland he had
never but once seen, and in that visit, he thought he had had reason to be
offended with him. If that gentleman treated the company of Mr. Prattle
and lord Martin, persons universally admired, as not good enough for him,
it seemed unaccountable that he should have recourse to him. He was
neither distinguished by the elegance of his accomplishments, nor did he
much pride himself in the attainments of literature. After many
conjectures, he at length determined with infinite sagacity, to suspend
his judgement, till Mr. Moreland mould solve the enigma.

This determination was scarcely made before his visitor arrived. That
gentleman, who, though full of sensibility and benevolence, was not a man
of empty ceremony, immediately opened his business. Mr. Hartley, drew
himself up in his chair, and, with the dignity of a citizen of London, who
thinks that the first character in the world, cried, "Well, sir, and who
is this nephew of yours? I think I never heard of him." "He is the son,"
answered Mr. Moreland, "of lord Thomas Villiers." "Lord Thomas Villiers!
Then I suppose he is a great man. And pray now, sir, if this great man has
a mind that his son should marry my daughter, why does he not come and
tell me so himself?" "Why in truth," said the other, "lord Thomas Villiers
has no mind. But my nephew is his only son, and therefore cannot be
deprived of the principal part of his estate after his death. In the mean
time, I will take care that he shall have an income perfectly equal to the
fortune of Miss Hartley." "You will sir! And so in the first place, this
young spark would have me encourage him in disobedience, which is the
greatest crime upon God's earth, and in the second, he thinks that I, Bob
Hartley, as I sit here, will marry my daughter into any family that is too
proud to own us." "As to that, sir," said Moreland, "you must judge for
yourself. The young gentleman is an unexceptionable match, and I, sir,
whose fortune and character I flatter myself are not inferior to that of
any gentleman in the county, shall always be proud to own and receive the
young lady." "Why as to that, to be sure, you may be in the right for
_auft_ that I know. But _howsomdever_, my daughter, do you see,
is already engaged to lord Martin." "I should have thought," replied
Moreland, "that objection might have been stated in the first instance,
without any reflexions upon the conduct and family of the young gentleman.
But are you sure that lord Martin is the man of your daughter's choice?"
"I cannot say that I ever _axed_ her, for I do not see what that has
to do with the matter. Lord Martin, do you see, is a fine young man, and a
fine fortune. And Delia is my own daughter, and if she should boggle about
having him, I would cut her off with a shilling." "Sir," answered
Moreland, with much indignation, "that is a conduct that would deserve to
be execrated. My nephew, without any sinister means, is master of your
daughter's affection; and lord Martin, I have authority to tell you, is
her aversion." "Oh, ho! is it so. Well then, sir, I will tell you what I
shall do. Your nephew shall never have my daughter, though she had but a
rag to her tail. And as for her affections and her aversion, I will lock
her up, and keep her upon bread and water, till she knows, that she ought
to have neither, before her own father has told her _what is what_."
Mr. Moreland, all of whose nerves were irritated into a fever by so much
vulgarity, and such brutal insensibility, could retain his seat no longer.
He started up, and regarding his entertainer with a look of ineffable
indignation, flung the door in his face, and retreated to his chariot.




CHAPTER IV.

_Much ado about nothing_.


Damon was inexpressibly afflicted at the success of his uncle's embassy.
When Mr. Moreland related to him the particulars of his visit, Damon
recollected the opposite tempers of the two gentlemen, and blamed himself
for not having foreseen the event. Mr. Hartley was infinitely exasperated
at the cavalierness with which he had been treated. He now discovered the
true cause of his daughter's pertinacity, and proceeded with more vigour
than ever.

"And so," cried he, "you have dared to engage your affections without my
privity, have you? A pretty story truly. And you would disgrace me for
ever, by marrying into the family of a lord, that despises us, and an old
fellow, that for half a word would knock your father's brains out."
"Indeed sir," replied Delia, "I never thought of marrying without your
consent. I only gave the young gentleman leave to ask it of you." "You
gave him leave! And pray who are you? And so you was in league with him to
send this fellow to abuse me?" "Upon my word, I was not. And I am very
sorry if Mr. Moreland has behaved improperly." "_If_ Mr. Moreland!
and so you pretend to doubt of it! But, let me tell you, I have provided
you a husband, worth fifty of this young prig, and I will make you think
so." "Indeed sir, I can never think so." "You cannot. And pray who told
you to object, before I have named the man. Why, child, lord Martin has
ten thousand pounds a year, and is a peer, and is not ashamed of us one
bit in all the world." "Alas, sir, I can never have lord Martin. Do not
mention him. I am in no hurry. I will live single as long as you please."
"Yes, and when you have persuaded me to that, you will jump out at window
the next day to this ungracious rascal." "Oh pray sir do not speak so. He
is good and gentle." "Why, hussey, am I not master in my own house? I
shall have a fine time of it indeed, if I must give you an account of my
words." "Sir," said Delia, "I will never marry without your consent."
"That is a good girl, no more you shall. And I will lock you up upon bread
and water, if you do not consent to marry who I please."

The despotic temper of Mr. Hartley led him to treat his daughter with
considerable severity. He suffered her to go very little abroad, and
employed every precaution in his power, to prevent any interview between
her and her lover. He tried every instrument in turn, threats, promises,
intreaties, blustering, to bend her to his will. And when he found that by
all these means he made no progress; as his last resource, he fixed a day
at no great distance, when he assured her he would be disappointed no
longer, and she should either voluntarily or by force yield her hand to
lord Martin.

During these transactions, the communication between Delia and her lover
was, with no great difficulty, kept open by the instrumentality of their
two friends. They scarcely dared indeed to think of seeing each other, as
in case this were discovered, Delia would be subject to still greater
restraint, and the intercourse, between her and Miss Fletcher, be rendered
more difficult. In one instance however, this lady ventured to procure the
interview so ardently desired by both parties.

Damon made use of this opportunity to persuade his mistress to an
elopement. "You have already carried," said he, "your obedience to the
utmost exremity. You have tried every means to bend the inflexible will of
your father. If not for my sake then, at least for your own, avoid the
crisis that is preparing for you. You detect the husband that your father
designs you. If united to him, you confess you must be miserable. But who
can tell, in the midst of persons inflexibly bent upon your ruin, no
friend at hand to support you, your Damon banished and at a distance, what
may be the event? You will hesitate and tremble, your father will
endeavour to terrify you into submission, the odious peer will force from
you your hand. If, in that moment, your heart should misgive you, if one
faultering accent belie the sentiments you have so generously avowed for
me, what, ah, what! may be the consequence? No, my fair one, fly,
instantly fly. No duty forbids. You have done all that the most rigid
moralist could demand of you. Put yourself into my protection. I will not
betray your confidence. You shall be as much mistress as ever of all your
actions. If you distrust me, at least chuse our common friends sir William
Twyford. Chuse any protector among the numerous friends, that your beauty
and your worth have raised you. I had rather sacrifice my own prospects of
felicity forever, than see the smallest chance that you should be
unhappy."

Such were the arguments, which, with all the eloquence of a friend, and
all the ardour of a lover, our hero urged upon his mistress. But the
gentleness of Delia was not yet sufficiently roused by the injuries she
had received, to induce her, to cast off all the ties which education and
custom had imposed upon her, and determine upon so decisive a step.
"Surely," said she, "there is some secret reward, some unexpected
deliverance in reserve, for filial simplicity. Oh, how harsh, how bold,
how questionable a step, is that to which you would persuade me!
Circumstanced in this manner, the fairest reputation might provoke the
tongue of scandal, and the most spotless innocence open a door to the
blast of calumny. I will not say that such a step may not be sometimes
justifiable. I will not say to what I may myself be urged. But oh, how
unmingled the triumph, how sincere the joy if, by persevering in a
conduct, in which the path of duty is too palpable to be mistaken,
propitious fate may rather grant me the happiness after which I aspire,
than I be forced, as it were, myself to wrest it from the hands of
providence!"

Such was the result of this last and decisive interview. Delia could not
be moved from that line of conduct, upon which she had so virtuously
resolved. And Damon having in vain exerted all the rhetoric of which he
was master, now gave way to the gloomy suggestions of despair, and now
flattered himself with the gleams of hope. He sometimes thought, that
Delia might yet be induced to adopt the plan he had proposed; and
sometimes he gave way to the serene confidence she expressed, and indulged
the pleasing expectation, that virtue would not always remain without its
reward.




CHAPTER V.

_A Woman of Learning_.


We are now brought, in the course of our story, to the memorable scene at
Miss Cranley's. "Miss Cranley's!" exclaims one of our readers, in a tone
of admiration. "Miss Cranley's!" cries another, "and pray who is she?"

I distribute my readers into two classes, the indolent and the
supercilious, and shall accordingly address them upon the present
occasion. To the former I have nothing more to say, than to refer them
back to the latter part of Chapter I., Part I. where, my dear ladies, you
will find an accurate account of the character of two personages, who it
seems you have totally forgotten.

To the supercilious I have a very different story to tell. Most learned
sirs, I kiss your hands. I acknowledge my error, and throw myself upon
your clemency. You see however, gentlemen, that you were somewhat
mistaken, when you imagined that I, like my fair patrons, the indolent,
had quite lost these characters from my memory.

To speak ingenuously, I did indeed suppose, as far as I could calculate
the events of this important narrative beforehand, that the Miss Cranleys
would have come in earlier, and have made a more conspicuous figure, than
they now seem to have any chance of doing. Having thus settled accounts
with my readers; I take up again the thread of my story, and thus I
proceed.

Mr. Hartley being now, as he believed, upon the point of disposing of his
daughter in marriage, began seriously to consider that he should want a
female companion to manage, his family, to nurse his ailments, and to
repair the breaches, that the hand of wintry time had made in his spirits
and his constitution. The reader will be pleased to recollect, that he had
already laid siege to the heart of the gentle Sophia. He now prosecuted
his affair with more alacrity than ever.

Alas, my dear readers! while we have been junketting along from
Southampton to Oxford, from Oxford to Windsor, and from Windsor to
Southampton back again, such is the miserable fate of human kind! Miss
Amelia Wilhelmina Cranley, the most pious of her sex, the flower of Mr.
Whitfield's converts, the wonder and admiration of Roger the cobler, has
given up the ghost. You will please then, in what follows, to represent to
yourselves the charms of Sophia as decked and burnished with a suit of
sables. Her exterior indeed was sable and gloomy, but her heart was far
superior to the attacks of wayward fate. She sat aloft in the region of
philosophy. She steeled her heart with the dignity of republicanism; for
her to drop one tear of sorrow would have been an eternal disgrace.

About this time--it was perhaps in reality a manoeuvre to forward the
affair, to which she had no aversion at bottom, with the father of
Delia--that Miss Cranley gave a grand entertainment, at which were present
Mr. Hartley, Mr. Prattle, sir William Twyford, lord Martin, most of the
ladies we have already commemorated, and many others.

The repast was conducted with much solemnity. The masculine character of
the mind of Sophia had rendered her particularly attached to the grace of
action. When she drank the health of any of her guests, she accompanied it
with a most profound _congè_. When she invited them to partake of any
dish, she pointed towards it with her hand. This action might have served
to display a graceful arm, but, alas! upon hers the hand of time had been
making depredations, and it appeared somewhat coarse and discoloured.

After dinner, the lady of the house, as usual, turned the conversation
upon the subject of politics. She inveighed with much warmth against the
effeminacy and depravity of the modern times. We were slaves, and we
deserved to be so. In almost every country there now appeared a king, that
puppet pageant, that monster in creation, miserable itself, a combination
of every vice, and invented for the curse of human kind. "Where now," she
asked, "was the sternness and inflexibility of ancient story? Where was
that Junius, that stood and gazed in triumph upon the execution of his
sons? Where that Fabricius, that turned up his nose under the snout of an
elephant? Where was that Marcus Brutus, who sent his dagger to the heart
of Cæsar? For her part, she believed, and she would not give the snap of
her fingers for him if it were otherwise, that he was in reality, as sage
historians have reported, the son of Julius."

In the very paroxysm of her oratory she chanced to cast her eyes upon Mr.
Prattle. With the character of Mr. Prattle, the reader is already partly
acquainted. But he does not yet know, for it was not necessary for our
story he should do so, that the honourable Mr. Prattle was a commoner and
a placeman. Good God, sir, represent to yourself with what a flame of
indignation our amazon surveyed him! She rose from her seat, and, taking
him by the hand, very familiarly turned him round in the middle of the
company. "This," said she, "is one of our Fabiuses, one of our Decii.
Good God, my friend, what would you do, if a brother officer shook a cane
over your shoulders as he did over those of the divine Themistocles? What
would you do, if the brutal lull of an Appius ravished from your arms an
only daughter? But I beg your pardon, sir. You are a placeman, mutually
disgracing and disgraced. You sell your constituents to the vilest
ministers, that ever came forward the champions of despotism. And those
ministers show us what is their insignificance, their impotence, their
want of discernment, in giving such a thing as you are, places of so great
importance, offices of so high emolument."

Mr. Prattle, unused to be treated so cavalierly, and arraigned before so
large a company, trembled in every limb: "My dear madam, my sweet Miss
Sophia, pray do not pinch quite so hard;" and the water stood in his eyes.
Unable however to elude her grasp he fell down upon his knees. "For God's
sake! Oh dear! Oh lack a daisy! Why, Miss, sure you are mad." Miss
Cranley, unheedful of his exclamations, was however just going to begin
with more vehemence than ever, when a sudden accident put a stop to the
torrent of her oratory. But this event cannot be properly related without
going back a little in our narrative, and acquainting the reader with some
of those circumstances by which it was produced.




CHAPTER VI.

_A Catastrophe_.


Sir William Twyford had gained great credit with lord Martin by his
conduct in the affair of Mr. Prettyman. He now imagined that he saw an
opening for the exercise of his humour, which he was never able to refill.
He communicated his plan to lord Martin. By his assistance he procured
that implement, which school-boys have denominated a cracker. This his
lordship found an opportunity of attaching to the skirt of Miss Cranley's
sack. At the moment we have described, when she was again going to enter
into the stream of her rhetoric, which, great as it naturally was, was now
somewhat improved with copious draughts of claret, the cracker was set on
fire.

Poor Sophia now started in great agitation. "Bounce, bounce," went the
cracker. Sophia skipped and danced from one end of the room to the other.
"Great gods of Rome," exclaimed she, "Jupiter, Minerva, and all the
celestial and infernal deities!" The force of the cracker was now somewhat
spent. "Ye boys of Britain, that bear not one mark of manhood about you!
Would Leonidas have fastened a squib to the robe of the Spartan mother?
Would Cimber have so unworthily used Portia, the wife of Brutus? Would
Corbulo thus have interrupted the heroic fortitude of Arria, the spouse of
Thrasea Paetus?"

"My dear madam," exclaimed lord Martin, his eyes glistening with triumph,
"with all submission, Corbulo I believe had been assassinated, before
Arria so gloriously put an end to her existence." "Thou thing," cried Miss
Cranky, "and hast thou escaped the torrent of my invective! Thou eternal
blot to the list, in which are inserted the names of a Faulkland, a
Shaftesbury, a Somers, and above all, that Leicester, who so bravely threw
the lie in the face of his sovereign!" "He! he!" cried lord Martin, who
could no longer refrain from boasting of his great atchievement. If I have
escaped your vengeance, let me tell you, madam, you have not escaped
"mine." "And was it thee, thou nincompoop? Hence, thou wretch! Avaunt!
Begone, or thou shalt feel my fury!" Saying this, she clenched her fist,
and closed her teeth, with so threatening an aspect, that the little peer
was very much terrified. He flew back several paces. "My dear Miss
Griskin," said he, "protect me! This barbarous woman does not understand
wit,"--and he precipitately burst out of the room. The lady too was so
much discomposed, that she thought proper to retire, assuring the company
that she would attend them again in a moment.

"Well," cried Miss Griskin, as soon as she had disappeared, "this was the
nicest fun!" "I was afraid," said Miss Prim, "it would have discomposed
Miss Cranley's petticoats." "Law, my dear!" said Miss Gawky, "by my
so, I like the music of a cracker, better than all the concerts in the
varsal world." We need not inform our readers, that Miss Languish, in the
very height and altitude of the confusion, had been obliged to retire.

Lord Martin, in the midst of his triumph and exultation, had not leisure
to recollect, nor perhaps penetration to perceive, the effect that this
little sally might have upon his interests. Despotic and boorish as was
the genius of Mr. Hartley, it cowred under that of Sophia with the most
abject servility. And that lady now vowed eternal war against the heroical
peer.

"Mr. Hartley," said she, in their next _tête a tête_, "let me tell
you, lord Martin, must never have Miss Delia." "My dearest life," said the
old gentleman, "consider, the day is fixed, my word is passed, and it is
too late to revoke now. Beside, lord Martin has ten thousand pounds a
year." "Ten thousand figs," said she, "do not tell me, it is never too
late to be wife. Lord Martin is a venal senator, and a little sniveling
fellow." "My dear," said Hartley, "I never differed from you before: do
let me have my mind now." "Have your mind, sir! Men should have no minds.
Tyrants that they are! And now I think of it, Miss Delia does not like
lord Martin." "Pooh," said Mr. Hartley, recovering spirit at such an
objection, "that is all stuff and nonsense." "Nonsense! Let me tell you,
sir, women are not _born to be controled_. They are queens of the
creation, and if they had their way, and the government of the world was
in their hands, things would go much better than they do." "I know they
would," replied her admirer, "if they were all as wise as you." "Child,"
returned Sophia, turning up her nose, "that is neither here nor there. The
matter in short is this. Damon loves Delia, and Delia loves Damon. And if
your daughter be not Mrs. Villiers, I will never be Mrs. Hartley."

From a decision like this there could be no appeal. Mr. Hartley told lord
Martin, the next time he came to his house to pay his devoirs to his
mistress, that he had altered his mind. His lordship was too much
surprised at this manoeuvre to make any immediate answer; so turned upon
his heel, and decamped.

The happy revolution, by the intervention of Miss Fletcher, was soon made
known to sir William and his friend. Damon now paid his addresses in form.
A reconciliation took place between Mr. Moreland and the father of our
heroine. The marriage was publicly talked of, the day was fixed, and every
thing prepared for the nuptials.

It is impossible to describe the happiness of our lovers, when they saw
every obstacle thus unexpectedly removed. Damon was beside himself with
surprise and congratulation. Delia, at intervals, rubbed her eyes, and
could scarcely be persuaded that it was not a dream. They saw each other
at least once every day. Together they wandered along the margin of the
ocean, and together they sought that delicious alcove, which now appeared
ten times more beautiful, from the recollection it suggested of the
sufferings they had passed.

Lord Martin was in the mean time most grievously disappointed. "The devil
damn the fellow!" said he, "he crosses me like my evil genius. I have a
month's mind to send him a challenge. He is a tall, big looking fellow to
be sure. But then if I could contrive to kill him. Ah, me! but fortune
does not always favour the brave. My reputation is established. I do not
want a duel for that. And for any other purpose, it is all a lottery. Fire
and furies, death and destruction! something must be done. Let me
think--_About my brain_."

But lord Martin was not the only one whose hopes were disappointed, by the
expected marriage of Delia. He loved her not, he felt not one flutter of
complacency about his heart. It was vanity that first prompted him to
address her. It was disappointed pride that now stung him. Even Mr.
Prattle viewed her with a more generous affection. His genius was not
indeed a daring one, but it was active and indefatigable. Squire Savage
did not feel the less, though he did not spend many words about it. He was
a blustering hector. He had the reputation of fearing nothing, and caring
for nothing, that stood in his way. There were also other lovers beside
these, _whom the muse knows not, nor desires to know_.

In this manner gins and snares seemed, on every side, to surround our
happy and heedless lovers. They sported on the brink. They sighed, and
smiled, and sang, and talked again. At length the eve of the day, from
which their future happiness was to be dated, arrived. They had but one
drawback, the continued averseness of lord Thomas Villiers. Damon was
however now obliged, together with Mr. Hartley, to attend the lawyers at
Mr. Moreland's, in order to complete the previous formalities.




CHAPTER VII.

_Containing what will terrify the reader._


At such a moment as this, a mind of delicacy and sensibility is fond of
solitude. Delia told Mrs. Bridget, that she would take her usual walk, and
be home time enough to superintend the oeconomy of supper, at which the
company of Damon and sir William Twyford was expected.

They accordingly arrived before nine o'clock. Mrs. Bridget expected her
mistress every moment. Damon and his friend would have gone out to meet
her, but they were not willing to leave Mr. Hartley alone. The clock
however struck ten, and no Delia appeared. Every one now began to be
seriously uneasy. Damon and sir William went in both her most favourite
walks to find her, but in vain. Messengers were dispatched twenty
different ways. The lover repaired to the mansion of Lord Martin. The
baronet immediately set out for the house of Mr. Savage.

Mr. Hartley, who, with the external of a bear, and the heart of a miser,
was not destitute of the feelings of a parent, was now exceedingly
agitated. He strided up and down the room with incredible velocity. He bit
his fingers with anxiety, and threw his wig into the fire. "As I am a good
man," said he, "Mr. Prattle lives but almost next door, and I will go to
him." Mr. Prattle was at home, and having heard his story, condoled with
him upon it with much apparent sincerity.

Damon met with the same success. Lord Martin received him with perfect
serenity. "Bless us," cried he, "and is Miss Delia gone? I never was more
astonished in my life. I do not know what to do," and he took a pinch of
snuff. "Mr. Villiers," said he, with the utmost gravity, "I have all
possible respect for you. Blast me! if I am not willing to forget all our
former rivalship. Tell me, sir, can I do you any service?" Damon had every
reason to be satisfied with his behaviour, and flew out of the house in a
moment.

Sir William Twyford did not however meet with the person he went in quest
of. Miss Savage informed him, that her brother, not two hours ago, had
received a letter, and immediately, without informing her of his design,
which indeed he very seldom did, ordered his best hunter out of the
stable. She added, that she had imagined, that he had received a summons
to a fox-chace early the next morning.

Such was the account brought by sir William to the anxious and distracted
Damon. "Alas," cried he, "it is but too plain? She is by this time in the
hands of that insensible boor. Oh, who can bear to think of it! He is
perhaps, at this moment, tormenting her with his nauseous familiarities,
and griping her soft and tender limbs! Oh, why was I born! Why was I ever
cheated with the phantom of happiness! Wretch, wretch that I am!"

With these words he burst out of the house, and flew along with surprising
rapidity. Sir William, having hastily ordered everything to be prepared
for a pursuit, immediately followed him. He found him, wafted, spent, and
almost insensible, lying beside a little brook that crossed the road. The
baronet raised him in his arms, and, with the gentlest accents that
friendship ever poured into a mortal ear, recovered him to life and
perception.

"Where am I?" said the disconsolate lover. "Who are you? ah, my friend, my
best, my tried friend! I know you now. How came I here? Has any thing
unfortunate happened? Where is my Delia?" "Let us seek her, my Villiers,"
said the baronet. "Seek her! What! is she lost? Oh, yes, I recollect it
now; she is gone, snatched from my arms. Let us pursue her! Let us
overtake her Oh that it may not be too late."

He now leaned upon the shoulder of his friend, and returned with painful
and irregular steps. His disorder was so great, that sir William thought
it best to have him immediately conveyed to a chamber. He was so much
exhausted, that this was easily accomplished, without his being perfectly
sensible what was done. The baronet, with three servants mounted on
horseback, immediately pursued the road towards London.--Having thus
related the confusion and grief that were occasioned by her sudden
disappearance, we will now return to our heroine.

She had advanced, according to the intention she had hinted to her
servant, towards the grove, where she had so often wandered with her
beloved. She was wrapped up and lost in the contemplation of her
approaching felicity. "And is every difficulty surmounted, and shall at
last my fate be twined with Damon's? Sure, it is too much, it cannot be!
Fate does not deal so partially with mortals. To bestow so vast a
happiness on one, while thousands pine in helpless misery. But let me not
be incredulous. Let me not be ungrateful. No, since heaven has thus
accumulated its favours on me, my future days shall all be spent in
raising the oppressed, and cheering the disconsolate. I will remember that
I also have tasted the cup of woe, that I have looked forward to
disappointment and despair. _Taught by the hand that pities me,_ I
will learn to pity others."

She was thus musing with herself, she was thus full of piety and virtuous
resolution, when, on a sudden, a trampling of horses behind her, roused
her from her reverie. Two persons advanced. But before she had time to
examine their features, or even to remove out of the path, by which they
seemed to be coming, the foremost of them leaping hastily upon the ground,
seized her by the waist, arid, in spite of all her struggling, placed her
on the front of the saddle, and instantly mounted with the utmost agility.
Cries and tears were vain. They were in a solitary path, little beaten by
the careful husbandman, or the gay votaries of fashion. She was now
hurried along, and generally at full speed, through a thousand bye paths,
that seemed capable of puzzling the most assiduous pursuit.

They had scarcely advanced two little miles, ere they arrived at a large
and broad highway. Here they found a chariot ready waiting for them, into
which Delia was immediately thrust. She now for the first time lifted up
her eyes. The first object to which she attended was the faces of her
ravishers. Of him who had been the most active, she had not the smallest
recollection. The other who was in a livery, she imagined she had seen
somewhere, though, in the present confusion of her mind, she could not fix
upon the place. She next looked round her with wildness and eagerness, as
far as her eye could reach, to see if there were no protector, no
deliverance near. But she looked in vain. All was solitude and stilness.
The murmurs, the activity of the day were past. And now, the silver moon
in radiant majesty shed a solemn serenity ever the whole scene. Serenity,
alas! to the heart at ease, but nothing could bring serenity to the
troubled breast of Delia.

As her last resource, she appealed to those who by brutal force had
carried her away. "Oh, if you have any hearts, any thing human that dwells
about you, pity a poor, forlorn, and helpless maid! Alas, in what have I
injured you? What would you do to me?" "Oh, pray, Miss, do not be
frightened," said the first ravisher with an accent of familiar vulgarity,
"we will do you no harm, we mean nothing but your good. You will make your
fortune. You never had such luck in your life. You will have reason to
thank us the longest day you can ever know."




CHAPTER VIII.

_A Denouement_.


At this moment, Delia with infinite transport, heard the sound of horses
at a distance. Every thing was quiet. Our heroine listened with eager
expectation, and those who guarded her looked out to see who it was that
approached. Suspense was not long on either side. The horsemen were up
with them in a moment. "Oh, whoever you are," cried Delia, in an agony of
distress, "pity and relieve the most miserable woman'"----She received no
answer, but the horses stopped, and lord Martin was in a moment at the
door of the carriage. "Oh, my lord," cried Delia, "is it you? Thanks,
eternal thanks, for this fortunate incident. If you had not come, heaven
knows what would have become of me! Those brutes, those wretches--But
conduct me, my lord, to my father's house. Without doubt, they must by
this time be in a terrible fright."

"Do not be uneasy," cried his lordship, endeavouring to assume an
harmonious, but missing his point, he spoke in the shrillest and most
squeaking accent that can be imagined. "Do not be uneasy, my charmer. You
are in the hands of a man, that loves you, as never woman was loved
before. But I will be with you in a minute," said he. And withdrawing
behind the carriage, he beckoned to the person who had conducted the
business of the rape. "Why, you incorrigible blockhead," said lord Martin,
"you have neglected half your instructions. Why, her hands are at
liberty." "I beg your honour's pardon," replied the pimp, "I had indeed
forgotten, but it shall be remedied in a moment." And saying this, he
pulled a strong ribband out of his pocket, and getting into the chariot,
fastened the soft and lily hands of our heroine behind her. She screamed,
and invoked the name of his lordship a thousand times. Her hair became
disentangled from its ligaments, and flowed in waving ringlets about her
snowy, panting bosom. Exhausted with continual agitation, and particularly
with the last struggle, she seemed ready to faint, but was quickly
restored by the assiduity of these sordid grooms.

Before she had completely recovered her recollection, lord Martin had
seated himself in the carriage, and was drawing up some of the blinds.
"Drive on," said he to the coachman, who was by this time mounted into the
box, "Drive, as if the devil was behind you." The cavalcade accordingly
went forward. There was a servant on each side of the carriage, beside the
commander in chief, who occasionally advanced in the front, and
occasionally brought up the rear.

"And whither," said the affrighted Delia, "whither are we going? This
cannot be the way to Southampton. What do you mean? But ah, it is too
plain! Why else this impotence of insult?" endeavouring to disengage her
hands. And she turned from him in a rage of indignation. "Ah," cried his
lordship, "do not avert those brilliant eyes! Turn them towards me, and
they will outshine the lustre of the morn, and I shall perceive nothing of
the sun, even when he gains his meridian height." "And thou despicable
wretch, is this thy shallow plan? And what dost thou think to do with me?
Mountains shall sooner bend their lofty summits to the earth, than I will
ever waste a thought on thee." "Do with thee, my fairest!" cried the peer,
"why, marry thee. Dost thou think that the paltry Damon shall get the
better of my eagle genius? No. Fortune now unfurls my standard, and I
drive the _frighted fates_ before me." "Boastful, empty coward! Thou
darest not even brave a woman's rage. If my hands were at liberty, I would
tear out those insolent eyes." "_Go on_, thou gentlest of thy sex,
_and charm me with that angel voice_! For though thou dealest in
threats, abuse, and proud defiance, _it is heaven to hear thee_."

Such was the courtship that passed between our heroine and her triumphant
admirer. They had new proceeded twenty miles, and the midnight bell had
tolled near half an hour. They had passed through one turnpike, and Delia
had endeavoured by cries and prayers to obtain some assistance. But the
person who opened to them was alone, and though ever so desirous, could
not have resisted such a cavalcade. Beside this, the pimp told him a
plausible story of a wanton wife, and an injured husband, with the
particulars of which we do not think it necessary to trouble our readers.
They had also seen one foot passenger, and two horsemen. But they were
eluded and amused by a repetition of the same stratagem.

Delia, having exhausted her first rage and astonishment, had now remained
for some time silent. She revolved in her mind all the particulars of her
situation. She had at first considered her ravisher in no other light than
as hateful and despicable, but she was now compelled to regard this
venomous little animal, as the arbiter of her fate, and the master of her
fortunes. She reflected with horror, how much she was in his power, what
ill usage he might inflict, and to what extremities he might reduce her.
She now seriously thought of exerting herself to melt him into pity, and
to persuade him, by every argument she could invent, to spare and to
release her. "Ah, where," thought she, "is my Damon? Why does not he
appear to succour me? Alas, what distresses, what agonies may he not even
now endure!"

Full of these, and a thousand other tormenting reflections, she burst into
a flood of tears. Lord Martin drew from his pocket a clean cambric
handkerchief, and, carefully unfolding it, wiped away the drops as they
fell. "Loveliest of creatures," said he, "by the murmuring of thy voice,
the heaving of thy bosom, the distraction of thy looks, and by these
tears, I should imagine thou wert uneasy." "Ah," cried Delia unheedful of
his words, "what shall I say to move him?" "Oh, talk for ever," replied
his lordship. "The winds shall forget to whistle, and the seas to roar.
Noisy mobs shall cease their huzzas, and the din of war be still; for
there is music in thy voice." "Oh," exclaimed our heroine, "let one touch
of compassion approach thy soul. Indeed, my lord, I can never have you.
Release me, and I will forgive what is past, and Damon shall never notice
it." "Zounds and fire!" cried the peer, "dost thou think to prevail with
me by the motives of a coward? But why dost thou talk of Damon? Look on
me. Behold this purple coat, and fine _toupèe_. Think on my estate,
and think on my title."

But at this moment the oratory of his lordship ceased to be heard. At a
small distance there appeared two persons, the one on foot, and whose air,
so far as it could be perceived by the imperfect light, was genteel, and
the other on horseback, engaged in earnest conference. As the carriage
drew towards them, Delia exclaimed, in a piercing, but pathetic voice,
"Help! help! for God's sake! Rape! Murder! Help!" The voice immediately
caught the young gentleman on foot, who approached the carriage.--But
before we proceed any farther we will inform our readers who these persons
were.

The gentleman on foot, was Mr. Godfrey. He was on a visit to a sister, who
lived very near the spot upon which he now stood. She was married to a
substantial yeoman, who rented an estate in this place, the property of
lord Thomas Villiers. The beautiful scenes of nature were particularly
congenial to the elegant said contemplative mind of Mr. Godfrey. And he
had now, as was frequently his custom, strolled out to enjoy the calm
serenity, and the splendid beauty, of a midnight scene. The man on
horse-back was a thief taker, who, just before the carriage had driven up,
had, without ceremony, accosted Mr. Godfrey with his enquiries, and a
description of the person of whom he was in pursuit.




CHAPTER IX.

_Which dismisses the Reader._


Mr. Godfrey, in a resolute tone, called out to the coachman to stop, and
not contented with a verbal mandate, he rushed before the horses, and
brandishing a club he held in his hand, bid the driver proceed at his
peril. "Drive on," said lord Martin, thrusting his head out at the
window--"Drive on, and be damned to you!" At this moment the pimp rode up.
"It is nothing," said he, "but a poor gentleman, who has just forced his
wife from the arms of a gallant." "Oh no!" cried Delia. "I am not his
wife. I am an innocent woman, whom he has forced from her father and her
lover."

The thief taker out of curiosity rode forward. "That," said he, fixing his
eye upon the pimp, "that is the very rascal I am in search of." The pimp,
who had only been borrowed by lord Martin of one of his more experienced
acquaintance, no sooner heard the sound, than, accounting for it with
infinite facility and readiness of mind, he turned about his horse, and
attempted to fly. One of the footmen, naturally a coward, and terrified at
these incidents, with the meaning of which he was unacquainted, imitated
his example. The other came forward to the assistance of his master, and
was laid prostrate upon the ground, by Mr. Godfrey with one blow. The
thief taker had the start of the pimp, and overtook him in a moment.

Mr. Godfrey now opened the door of the carriage. But the little peer was
prepared for this incident, and having his sword drawn, made a sudden pass
at our generous knight-errant. The latter, with infinite agility, leaped
aside, and lifting up his club, shivered the sword into a thousand pieces.

"Death and the devil! Pox confound you!" said lord Martin, and endeavoured
to draw a pistol from his pocket. But the unsuccessful pass he had made
had thrown him somewhat off his bias, and though he had employed more than
one effort, he had not been able to recover himself. At this instant, Mr.
Godfrey seized him by the collar, and with a sudden-whirl, threw him into
the middle of the road. "Fire and"--his lordship had not time to finish
his exclamation. The part of the road in which he fell was exceeding
dirty. The workmen had been employed the preceding day, in scraping the
mud together into a heap against the bank, and his lordship, unable to
overcome the velocity with which he trundled along, rolled into the midst
of it in an instant. He was entirely lost in this soft receptacle. The
colour of his purple coat, and his lily white _toupèe_, could no
longer be distinguished.

The coachman, perceiving the disaster of his lord, now leaped from the
box. Mr. Godfrey had scarcely had time to reduce this new antagonist to a
state of inactivity, before the footman, upon whom he had first displayed
his prowess, began to discover some signs of life. He might have been yet
overpowered in spite of all his valour and presence of mind, if the house
of his brother-in-law, had not fortunately been so near, that the shrieks
of Delia, and the altercation of her ravishers reached it. The honest
farmer was at the window in a moment, and perceiving that his brother was
engaged in the affray, he huddled on his clothes with all expedition, and
now appeared in the highway.

The victory was immediately decided. The footman perceiving this new
reinforcement, did not dare to act upon the offensive, and Mr. Godfrey
mounted into the chariot to assist our heroine. He now first perceived
that her hands were manacled. From this restraint however, he suddenly
disengaged her, and taking her in his arms out of the carriage, he
delivered her to his sister, who advanced at this moment.

The footman, assisted by the humanity of the farmer, was now employed in
raising his master. His lordship made the most pitiable figure that can be
imagined. His features, as well as his dress, wore an appearance perfectly
uniform. "Whither would you convey him?" said Mr. Godfrey, who was now
returned. "What shall we do with him?" "Oh, and please you, sir," said the
footman, "his lordship has a house about half a mile off." Lord Martin now
first discovered some marks of sensibility, and _shook his goary
locks_. "His lordship!" exclaimed the yeoman. "Sure it cannot be--yet
it is--by my soul I cannot tell whether it be lord Martin or no." The
coachman now rose from the ground, and began with a profound bow to his
master. "And please your honour," said he, "we have made a sad day's work
of it. Your worship makes but a pitiful figure. Faugh! I think as how, if
I dared say so much, begging your honour's pardon, that your lordship
stinks." "Put him into the carriage," cried Mr. Godfrey, "and drive him
home." Lord Martin, now first recovered his tongue, and wiping away the
mud from his eyes, "And so it was you, sir, I suppose," cried he, "to whom
I am obliged for this catastrophe. But pox take me, if you shall not hear
of it. Ten thousand curses on my wayward fate! The devil take it! Death
and damnation!" During this soliloquy, the servants were employed in
placing their lord in the chariot. The coachman mounted the box, and by
this time they were out of hearing.

Mr. Godfrey and his brother now entered the house. Delia was seated in a
chair, her hair dishevelled, her features disordered, and her dress in the
most bewitching confusion. But how much were both the deliverer and the
heroine surprised, when they mutually recognised each others features! Mr.
Godfrey made Delia a very polite compliment upon her escape, and
congratulated himself, in the warmest language, for having been the
fortunate instrument.

They now retired to rest. The next morning, Delia was much better
recovered from her terror and fatigue, than could have been expected. Mr.
Godfrey however had not thought it adviseable that she should be removed
that day, and had therefore set off early in the morning for Southampton,
that he might himself be the messenger of these happy tidings.

"I hope Miss," said Mrs. Wilson, who attended our heroine, "that you will
dress yourself as well as you can." "And why" cried Delia, "do you desire
that? I can see nobody, I can think of nothing, but my absent and anxious
Damon." "Let us hope," replied the other, "that he is very well. But,
Miss, we expect lord Thomas Villiers by dinner time." "Lord Thomas
Villiers!" exclaimed Delia, in the extremest surprise. "Yes," cried Mrs.
Wilson. "He is our landlord, and he always comes over once about this time
of the year." "Alas," said Delia, "I can see nobody. But I had rather meet
any person at this time, than lord Thomas Villiers." "Bless me, Miss! why
I am sure he is a very good sort of a gentleman." "I dare say he is,"
cried Delia. "But indeed, and indeed, Mrs. Wilson, I cannot see him. Pray
oblige me in this." "Law, well I cannot think what objection you can have!
There must be something very particular in it."

Such were the hints that Mrs. Wilson threw out for the satisfying of her
curiosity, but Delia was not disposed to be more communicative. The good
woman however, with the error of our heroine before her eyes, was
determined not to commit a similar fault. Lord Thomas was therefore
scarcely arrived, before she set open the flood gates of her eloquence, in
describing the rescue, and the unrivalled beauty of the lady under her
roof.

His lordship had long had a misunderstanding with lord Martin upon the
subject of their contiguous estates. As his temper was not the most
gentle, nor his memory upon these subjects the most treacherous, he
expressed his triumph in loud shouts, and repeated horse laughs, upon the
recent defeat of his antagonist. Nothing however would content him but a
sight of the lady. "That," said Mrs. Wilson, "my guess is too nice to
consent to. You must know, she has a particular dislike to your lordship."
"A dislike to me!" said the old gentleman, whose curiosity was now more
inflamed than even "Will you be contented," said his kind hostess, "with a
peep through the key hole!" and without waiting for an answer, she took
him by the hand, and led him up stairs. "By my foul!" said his lordship,
"she is the finest woman in the world. Devil take me, if I can contain
myself," and he burst into the room.

Lord Thomas advanced a few steps, and then stopping, clasped his hands;
"Why she is an angel of a woman! And did Martin, that dirty scoundrel,
think he could run away with you? Impudent, pot-bellied spider! Ah, if my
son had fallen in love with such a woman as you, I could forgive him any
thing." And seizing her hand he pressed it to his lips. "Forgive me,
charmer," cried he, "I am an old fellow. I will do you no harm."

Delia, though pleased with the behaviour of her intended father-in-law,
dared not yet discover herself to him. In the afternoon, Mr. Godfrey, and
Sir William Twyford, arrived. Damon, agitated as he was by the most
dreadful images that a troubled fancy could suggest, appeared in the
morning in a high fever. Instead of being able to hasten to the mistress
of his soul, he was confined to his bed, and attended by physicians.

"Ha," cried lord Thomas, as soon as he saw the baronet, "and who sent for
you? What do you want? I think, Sir, you are the gentleman to whom I am
obliged for telling my son, that duty to parents is a baby prejudice, that
obstinacy is a heroic virtue, and that fortune, fame, and friends, are all
to be sacrificed to the whining passion, which, I think, you call love."
"My lord," replied the baronet, "I have done nothing, of which I feel any
reason to be ashamed. But a subject more pressing calls for my immediate
attention." Then turning to Delia, "Give me leave to congratulate you,
madam, and heaven can tell how heartily I do it, upon the generous and
happy interposition of Mr. Godfrey." "And pray," interrupted lord Thomas,
"how came you acquainted with that lady?" "Oh, tell me," cried Delia, with
an impatience not to be restrained by modes and forms, "tell me, how does
my Damon? Why is he not here? Alas, I fear"--"Fear nothing," cried the
baronet. "He is safe. He is at your father's house, and impatient to see
you." "And is this the lady," cried lord Thomas, "of whom my son is
enamoured? But he shall not disobey me. I will never permit it. Sir, if
this be the lady, I will give her to him with my own hand. But where is
the ungracious rascal? Why does not he appear?" "Nothing, be assured,"
said the baronet, "but reasons of the last importance, could have kept him
back in so interesting a moment." "Alas, I fear," cried Delia, "since you
endeavour to conceal them from me, they are reasons of the most afflicting
nature." "It is in vain," replied Sir William, "to endeavour at
concealment." "Your son," turning to lord Thomas Villiers, "is confined to
his bed. The anxiety and fatigue that he suffered, in consequence of the
extraordinary step of lord Martin, have thrown him into a fever. But be
not uneasy, my Delia," taking her hand, "there is no danger. One sigh, one
look from you will restore him." "Ten thousand curses," exclaimed the
father, "upon the head of the contemptible, misbegotten ravisher! But let
us make haste. I am glad however that my rogue of a son is a little
punished for his impertinence. Let us make haste."

Saying this, he ordered the horses to his chariot, and the whole company
prepared to set out for Southampton immediately. The only business which
remained, was the dispatching a message, which was done by one of sir
William's servants, from Mr. Godfrey to lord Martin, announcing his name,
and informing his lordship, that he was to be met with any time in the
ensuing week at Mr. Moreland's.

Lord Martin was a good deal bruised and enfeebled with the adventure of
the preceding evening. He had been obliged to undergo a lustration of near
an hour, before he could be put to bed. He was just risen, when the
message was delivered. "Zounds!" cried the peer, "he is, is he? And so
this fellow, whom nobody knows, has the impudence to snub me! By my title,
and all the blood of my ancestors, he is not worthy of my sword. I will
have him assassinated. I will hire some blackguards to seize him, and bind
him in my presence, and I will bastinado him with my own hand. Furies and
curses! I do not know what to do. Oh, this confounded vanity! Not
contented with one disgrace, I have brought upon myself another, ten times
more mortifying than the first. By Tartarus, and all the infernal gods, I
believe I had better let it rest where it is! Wretch, wretch, that I am!"
And he threw himself on the bed in an agony of despair.

Damon had slept little the preceding night, and his slumbers had been
disturbed with a thousand horrible imaginations. The first person who
appeared in his chamber the next morning he addressed with "Where, where
is she? Where is my Delia? My life, my soul, the mistress of my fate? Ah,
why do you look so haggard, so unconsoling. You have heard nothing of her?
Give me my clothes. I will pursue her to the world's end. I will find her,
though she be hid deep as the centre." "Sir, be pacified," said the
servant, "she is safe." "Safe," cried our lover, "why then does she not
appear to comfort me? But haste, I will fly to her. I will clasp, I will
lock her, in my arms. No, nothing, not all the powers on earth, shall ever
part us more." "Sir, she is not in the house." "Not in the house," cried
Damon starting, "Ha! say. I will not be cheated. On thy life do not trifle
with my impatience."

At this moment Mr. Godfrey entered the room. "Who is there?" cried Damon,
starting at every whisper. "It is your friend," said Godfrey. "A friend
that owes you much, and would willingly pay you something back again." "I
do not understand you," replied our hero. "I can talk of nothing but my
Delia. Oh Delia! Delia! I will teach thy name to all the echoes. I will
send it with every wind to heaven. Ever, ever, shall it dwell upon my
lips." "Delia," replied the other, "is in safety. I have been so happy as
to rescue her." "Ha! sayest thou? let me look upon thee well. I am
somewhat disordered, but I think thy name is Godfrey. Thou shouldst not
deceive me. Thou art not old in falsehood." "I do not deceive thee. On my
life I do not!" exclaimed Godfrey, with emotion. "Compose thyself for a
few hours. Or ever thou shalt see the setting sun, I will put thy Delia
into thy arms again."

Damon was somewhat composed by these assurances. No voice like that of
Godfrey had power to sooth his mind to serenity. But though he sought to
restrain himself, he listened to every noise. He started at the sound of
every foot, and the rattle of a carriage in the street agitated his soul
almost to frenzy.

"Why does not she come? What can delay her? I have counted every moment.
I have waited whole ages. I see, I see, that every thing conspires to
cheat, and to distract me. Damon has not one friend left to whisper in his
ear--to whisper what? That Delia is no more? That all her beauties are
defaced, by some sacrilegious hand? That all her heaven of charms have
been rifled? Oh, no. I must not think of that. But hark! I thought I heard
a sound, but it is delirium all. Sure, sure it comes this way. I will
listen but this once."

The door of the chamber now flew open. But oh, what object caught the
raptured eye of Damon! He was just risen. "It is, it is my Delia!" and
they flew into each others arms. But having embraced for a moment, Damon
took hold of her hand, and held her from him. "Let me look at thee. And is
it Delia? And art thou safe, unhurt? I would not be mistaken." "Yes, I am
she, and ten times more my Damon's than ever." "It is enough. I am
contented. But hark! who comes there? Sure it is not the brutal ravisher?
No," cried he, in a voice of surprise, "it is my father."

Lord Thomas Villiers, who had been a witness of this scene, could restrain
himself no longer. "Come to my arms, thy father's arms," cried he, "and
let me bless thee." "Stay, stay," cried Damon. "Yes I know thee well. But
I will never be separated from her any more. I will laugh at the authority
of a parent. Tyranny and tortures shall not rend me from her." "The
authority of a parent," replied lord Thomas, "shall never more be employed
to counteract thy wishes. I myself will join your hands."

The constitution of Damon was so full of sensibility, that it was some
days before he was completely recovered. In the mean time, the amours of
Sir William Twyford, and Mr. Hartley, continually ripened, and it was
proposed, that the three parties should be united in the same day.

"And now," said Damon, "I have but one care more, one additional exertion,
to set my mind at ease. My Godfrey, I owe thee more than kingdoms can
repay. Tell me, instruct me, what can I do to serve you? Damon must be the
most contemptible of villains, if he could think his felicity complete,
when his Godfrey was unhappy."

"Think not of me," said Godfrey, "I am happy in the way that nature
intended, beyond even the power of Damon to make me. Since I saw you, a
favourable change has taken place in my circumstances. In spite of various
obstacles, I have brought a tragedy upon the stage, and it has met with
distinguished success. My former crosses and mortifications are all
forgotten. Philosophers may tell us, that reputation, and the immortality
of a name, are all but an airy shadow. Enough for me, that nature, from my
earliest infancy, led me to place my first delight in these. I envy not
kings their sceptres. I envy not statesmen their power. I envy not Damon
his love, and his Delia. Next to the pursuits of honour and truth, my soul
is conscious to but one wish, that of having my name enrolled, in however
inferior a rank, with a Homer, and a Horace, a Livy, and a Cicero."

The next day the proposed weddings took place. It is natural perhaps, at
the conclusion of such a narrative as this, to represent them all as
happy. But we are bound to adhere to nature and truth. Mr. Hartley and his
politician for some time struggled for superiority, but, in the end, the
eagle genius of Sophia soared aloft. Sir William, though he married a
woman, good natured, and destitute of vice, found something more insipid
in marriage, than he had previously apprehended. For Damon and his Delia,
they were amiable, and constant. Though their hearts were in the highest
degree susceptible and affectionate, the first ebullition of passion could
not last for ever. But it was succeeded by _the feast of reason, and the
flow of soul_. Their hours were sped with the calmness of tranquility.
When they saw each other no longer with transport, they saw each other
with complacency. And so long as they live, they will doubtless afford the
most striking demonstration, that marriage, when it unites two gentle
souls, and meaned by nature for each other, when it is blest of heaven,
and accompanied with reason and discretion, is the sweetest, and the
fairest of all the bands of society.


THE END.


LIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS:

OR

AN ACCOUNT OF THE MOST EMINENT PERSONS IN SUCCESSIVE AGES, WHO HAVE
CLAIMED FOR THEMSELVES, OR TO WHOM HAS BEEN IMPUTED BY OTHERS,

THE

EXERCISE OF MAGICAL POWER.


BY  WILLIAM  GODWIN.


LONDON

Frederick J Mason, 444, West Strand

1834





PREFACE.


The main purpose of this book is to exhibit a fair delineation of the
credulity of the human mind. Such an exhibition cannot fail to be
productive of the most salutary lessons.

One view of the subject will teach us a useful pride in the abundance
of our faculties. Without pride man is in reality of little value. It
is pride that stimulates us to all our great undertakings. Without
pride, and the secret persuasion of extraordinary talents, what man
would take up the pen with a view to produce an important work,
whether of imagination and poetry, or of profound science, or of acute
and subtle reasoning and intellectual anatomy? It is pride in this
sense that makes the great general and the consummate legislator, that
animates us to tasks the most laborious, and causes us to shrink from
no difficulty, and to be confounded and overwhelmed with no obstacle
that can be interposed in our path.

Nothing can be more striking than the contrast between man and the
inferior animals. The latter live only for the day, and see for the
most part only what is immediately before them. But man lives in the
past and the future. He reasons upon and improves by the past; he
records the acts of a long series of generations: and he looks into
future time, lays down plans which he shall be months and years in
bringing to maturity, and contrives machines and delineates systems
of education and government, which may gradually add to the
accommodations of all, and raise the species generally into a nobler
and more honourable character than our ancestors were capable of
sustaining.

Man looks through nature, and is able to reduce its parts into a great
whole. He classes the beings which are found in it, both animate and
inanimate, delineates and describes them, investigates their
properties, and records their capacities, their good and evil
qualities, their dangers and their uses.

Nor does he only see all that is; but he also images all that is not.
He takes to pieces the substances that are, and combines their parts
into new arrangements. He peoples all the elements from the world of
his imagination. It is here that he is most extraordinary and
wonderful. The record of what actually is, and has happened in the
series of human events, is perhaps the smallest part of human history.
If we would know man in all his subtleties, we must deviate into the
world of miracles and sorcery. To know the things that are not, and
cannot be, but have been imagined and believed, is the most curious
chapter in the annals of man. To observe the actual results of these
imaginary phenomena, and the crimes and cruelties they have caused us
to commit, is one of the most instructive studies in which we can
possibly be engaged. It is here that man is most astonishing, and that
we contemplate with most admiration the discursive and unbounded
nature of his faculties.

But, if a recollection of the examples of the credulity of the human
mind may in one view supply nourishment to our pride, it still more
obviously tends to teach us sobriety and humiliation. Man in his
genuine and direct sphere is the disciple of reason; it is by this
faculty that he draws inferences, exerts his prudence, and displays
the ingenuity of machinery, and the subtlety of system both in natural
and moral philosophy. Yet what so irrational as man? Not contented
with making use of the powers we possess, for the purpose of conducing
to our accommodation and well being, we with a daring spirit inquire
into the invisible causes of what we see, and people all nature with
Gods "of every shape and size" and angels, with principalities and
powers, with beneficent beings who "take charge concerning us lest at
any time we dash our foot against a stone," and with devils who are
perpetually on the watch to perplex us and do us injury. And, having
familiarised our minds with the conceptions of these beings, we
immediately aspire to hold communion with them. We represent to
ourselves God, as "walking in the garden with us in the cool of the
day," and teach ourselves "not to forget to entertain strangers, lest
by so doing we should repel angels unawares."

No sooner are we, even in a slight degree, acquainted with the laws of
nature, than we frame to ourselves the idea, by the aid of some
invisible ally, of suspending their operation, of calling out meteors
in the sky, of commanding storms and tempests, of arresting the motion
of the heavenly bodies, of producing miraculous cures upon the bodies
of our fellow-men, or afflicting them with disease and death, of
calling up the deceased from the silence of the grave, and compelling
them to disclose "the secrets of the world unknown."

But, what is most deplorable, we are not contented to endeavour to
secure the aid of God and good angels, but we also aspire to enter
into alliance with devils, and beings destined for their rebellion to
suffer eternally the pains of hell. As they are supposed to be of a
character perverted and depraved, we of course apply to them
principally for purposes of wantonness, or of malice and revenge. And,
in the instances which have occurred only a few centuries back, the
most common idea has been of a compact entered into by an unprincipled
and impious human being with the sworn enemy of God and man, in the
result of which the devil engages to serve the capricious will and
perform the behests of his blasphemous votary for a certain number of
years, while the deluded wretch in return engages to renounce his God
and Saviour, and surrender himself body and soul to the pains of hell
from the end of that term to all eternity. No sooner do we imagine
human beings invested with these wonderful powers, and conceive them
as called into action for the most malignant purposes, than we become
the passive and terrified slaves of the creatures of our own
imaginations, and fear to be assailed at every moment by beings to
whose power we can set no limit, and whose modes of hostility no human
sagacity can anticipate and provide against. But, what is still more
extraordinary, the human creatures that pretend to these powers have
often been found as completely the dupes of this supernatural
machinery, as the most timid wretch that stands in terror at its
expected operation; and no phenomenon has been more common than the
confession of these allies of hell, that they have verily and indeed
held commerce and formed plots and conspiracies with Satan.

The consequence of this state of things has been, that criminal
jurisprudence and the last severities of the law have been called
forth to an amazing extent to exterminate witches and witchcraft. More
especially in the sixteenth century hundreds and thousands were burned
alive within the compass of a small territory; and judges, the
directors of the scene, a Nicholas Remi, a De Lancre, and many others,
have published copious volumes, entering into a minute detail of the
system and fashion of the witchcraft of the professors, whom they sent
in multitudes to expiate their depravity at the gallows and the stake.

One useful lesson which we may derive from the detail of these
particulars, is the folly in most cases of imputing pure and unmingled
hypocrisy to man. The human mind is of so ductile a character that,
like what is affirmed of charity by the apostle, it "believeth all
things, and endureth all things." We are not at liberty to trifle with
the sacredness of truth. While we persuade others, we begin to deceive
ourselves. Human life is a drama of that sort, that, while we act our
part, and endeavour to do justice to the sentiments which are put down
for us, we begin to believe we are the thing we would represent.

To shew however the modes in which the delusion acts upon the person
through whom it operates, is not properly the scope of this book. Here
and there I have suggested hints to this purpose, which the curious
reader may follow to their furthest extent, and discover how with
perfect good faith the artist may bring himself to swallow the
grossest impossibilities. But the work I have written is not a
treatise of natural magic. It rather proposes to display the immense
wealth of the faculty of imagination, and to shew the extravagances of
which the man may be guilty who surrenders himself to its guidance.

It is fit however that the reader should bear in mind, that what is
put down in this book is but a small part and scantling of the acts of
sorcery and witchcraft which have existed in human society. They have
been found in all ages and countries. The torrid zone and the frozen
north have neither of them escaped from a fruitful harvest of this
sort of offspring. In ages of ignorance they have been especially at
home; and the races of men that have left no records behind them to
tell almost that they existed, have been most of all rife in deeds of
darkness, and those marvellous incidents which especially astonish the
spectator, and throw back the infant reason of man into those shades
and that obscurity from which it had so recently endeavoured to
escape.

I wind up for the present my literary labours with the production of
this book. Nor let any reader imagine that I here put into his hands a
mere work of idle recreation. It will be found pregnant with deeper
uses. The wildest extravagances of human fancy, the most deplorable
perversion of human faculties, and the most horrible distortions of
jurisprudence, may occasionally afford us a salutary lesson. I love in
the foremost place to contemplate man in all his honours and in all
the exaltation of wisdom and virtue; but it will also be occasionally
of service to us to look into his obliquities, and distinctly to
remark how great and portentous have been his absurdities and his
follies.

_May_ 29, 1834.




CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION

AMBITIOUS NATURE OF MAN
  HIS DESIRE TO PENETRATE INTO FUTURITY
  DIVINATION
  AUGURY
  CHIROMANCY
  PHYSIOGNOMY
  INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS
  CASTING OF LOTS
  ASTROLOGY
  ORACLES
  DELPHI
  THE DESIRE TO  COMMAND AND CONTROL FUTURE EVENTS
  COMMERCE WITH THE INVISIBLE WORLD
  SORCERY AND ENCHANTMENT
  WITCHCRAFT
  COMPACTS WITH THE DEVIL
  IMPS
  TALISMANS AND AMULETS
  NECROMANCY
  ALCHEMY
  FAIRIES
  ROSICRUCIANS
  SYLPHS AND GNOMES, SALAMANDERS AND UNDINES

EXAMPLES OF NECROMANCY AND WITCHCRAFT FROM THE BIBLE
  THE MAGI, OR WISE MEN OF THE EAST
  EGYPT
  STATUE OF MEMNON
  TEMPLE OF JUPITER AMMON: ITS ORACLES
  CHALDEA AND BABYLON
  ZOROASTER

GREECE
  DEITIES OF GREECE
  DEMIGODS
  DAEDALUS
  THE ARGONAUTS
  MEDEA
  CIRCE
  ORPHEUS
  AMPHION
  TIRESIAS
  ABARIS
  PYTHAGORAS
  EPIMENIDES
  EMPEDOCLES
  ARISTEAS
  HERMOTIMUS
  THE MOTHER OF DEMARATUS, KING OF SPARTA
  ORACLES
  INVASION OF XERXES INTO GREECE
  DEMOCRITUS
  SOCRATES

ROME
  VIRGIL
  POLYDORUS
  DIDO
  ROMULUS
  NUMA
  TULLUS HOSTILIUS
  ACCIUS NAVIUS
  SERVIUS TULLIUS
  THE SORCERESS OF VIRGIL
  CANIDIA
  ERICHTHO
  SERTORIUS
  CASTING OUT DEVILS
  SIMON MAGUS
  ELYMAS, THE SORCERER
  NERO
  VESPASIAN
  APOLLONIUS OF TYANA
  APULEIUS
  ALEXANDER THE PAPHLAGONIAN

REVOLUTION PRODUCED IN THE HISTORY OF NECROMANCY AND WITCHCRAFT UPON
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF CHRISTIANITY
  MAGICAL CONSULTATIONS RESPECTING THE LIFE OF THE EMPEROR

HISTORY OF NECROMANCY IN THE EAST
  GENERAL SILENCE OF THE EAST RESPECTING INDIVIDUAL NECROMANCERS
  ROCAIL
  HAKEM, OTHERWISE MACANNA
  ARABIAN NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENTS
  PERSIAN TALES
  STORY OF A GOULE
  ARABIAN NIGHTS
  RESEMBLANCE OF THE TALES OF THE EAST AND OF EUROPE
  CAUSES OF HUMAN CREDULITY

DARK AGES OF EUROPE
  MERLIN
  ST. DUNSTAN

COMMUNICATION OF EUROPE AND THE SARACENS
  GERBERT, POPE SILVESTER II
  BENEDICT THE NINTH
  GREGORY THE SEVENTH
  DUFF, KING OF SCOTLAND
  MACBETH
  VIRGIL
  ROBERT OF LINCOLN
  MICHAEL SCOT
  THE DEAN OF BADAJOZ
  MIRACLE OF THE TUB OF WATER
  INSTITUTION OF FRIARS
  ALBERTUS MAGNUS
  ROGER BACON
  THOMAS AQUINAS
  PETER OF APONO
  ENGLISH LAW OF HIGH TREASON
  ZIITO
  TRANSMUTATION OF METALS
  ARTEPHIUS
  RAYMOND LULLI
  ARNOLD OF VILLENEUVE
  ENGLISH LAWS RESPECTING TRANSMUTATION

REVIVAL OF LETTERS
  JOAN OF ARC
  ELEANOR COBHAM, DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER
  RICHARD III

SANGUINARY  PROCEEDINGS AGAINST WITCHCRAFT
  SAVONAROLA
  TRITHEMIUS
  LUTHER
  CORNELIUS AGRIPPA
  FAUSTUS
  SABELLICUS
  PARACELSUS
  CARDAN
  QUACKS, WHO IN COOL BLOOD UNDERTOOK TO OVERREACH MANKIND
  BENVENUTO CELLINI
  NOSTRADAMUS
  DOCTOR DEE
  EARL OF DERBY
  KING JAMES'S VOYAGE TO NORWAY
  JOHN FIAN
  KING JAMES'S DEMONOLOGY
  STATUTE, 1 JAMES I
  FORMAN AND OTHERS
  LATEST IDEAS OF JAMES ON THE SUBJECT
  LANCASHIRE WITCHES
  LADY DAVIES
  EDWARD FAIRFAX
  DOCTOR LAMB
  URBAIN GRANDIER
  ASTROLOGY
  WILLIAM LILLY
  MATTHEW HOPKINS
  CROMWEL
  DOROTHY MATELEY
  WITCHES HANGED BY SIR MATTHEW HALE
  WITCHCRAFT IN SWEDEN
  WITCHCRAFT IN NEW ENGLAND

CONCLUSION




LIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS


The improvements that have been effected in natural philosophy have by
degrees convinced the enlightened part of mankind that the material
universe is every where subject to laws, fixed in their weight,
measure and duration, capable of the most exact calculation, and which
in no case admit of variation and exception. Whatever is not thus to
be accounted for is of mind, and springs from the volition of some
being, of which the material form is subjected to our senses, and the
action of which is in like manner regulated by the laws of matter.
Beside this, mind, as well as matter, is subject to fixed laws; and
thus every phenomenon and occurrence around us is rendered a topic for
the speculations of sagacity and foresight. Such is the creed which
science has universally prescribed to the judicious and reflecting
among us.

It was otherwise in the infancy and less mature state of human
knowledge. The chain of causes and consequences was yet unrecognized;
and events perpetually occurred, for which no sagacity that was then
in being was able to assign an original. Hence men felt themselves
habitually disposed to refer many of the appearances with which they
were conversant to the agency of invisible intelligences; sometimes
under the influence of a benignant disposition, sometimes of malice,
and sometimes perhaps from an inclination to make themselves sport of
the wonder and astonishment of ignorant mortals. Omens and portents
told these men of some piece of good or ill fortune speedily to befal
them. The flight of birds was watched by them, as foretokening
somewhat important. Thunder excited in them a feeling of supernatural
terror. Eclipses with fear of change perplexed the nations. The
phenomena of the heavens, regular and irregular, were anxiously
remarked from the same principle. During the hours of darkness men
were apt to see a supernatural being in every bush; and they could not
cross a receptacle for the dead, without expecting to encounter some
one of the departed uneasily wandering among graves, or commissioned
to reveal somewhat momentous and deeply affecting to the survivors.
Fairies danced in the moonlight glade; and something preternatural
perpetually occurred to fill the living with admiration and awe.

All this gradually reduced itself into a system. Mankind, particularly
in the dark and ignorant ages, were divided into the strong and the
weak; the strong and weak of animal frame, when corporeal strength
more decidedly bore sway than in a period of greater cultivation; and
the strong and weak in reference to intellect; those who were bold,
audacious and enterprising in acquiring an ascendancy over their
fellow-men, and those who truckled, submitted, and were acted upon,
from an innate consciousness of inferiority, and a superstitious
looking up to such as were of greater natural or acquired endowments
than themselves. The strong in intellect were eager to avail
themselves of their superiority, by means that escaped the penetration
of the multitude, and had recourse to various artifices to effect
their ends. Beside this, they became the dupes of their own practices.
They set out at first in their conception of things from the level of
the vulgar. They applied themselves diligently to the unravelling of
what was unknown; wonder mingled with their contemplation; they
abstracted their minds from things of ordinary occurrence, and, as we
may denominate it, of real life, till at length they lost their true
balance amidst the astonishment they sought to produce in their
inferiors. They felt a vocation to things extraordinary; and they
willingly gave scope and line without limit to that which engendered
in themselves the most gratifying sensations, at the same time that it
answered the purposes of their ambition.

As these principles in the two parties, the more refined and the
vulgar, are universal, and derive their origin from the nature of man,
it has necessarily happened that this faith in extraordinary events,
and superstitious fear of what is supernatural, has diffused itself
through every climate of the world, in a certain stage of human
intellect, and while refinement had not yet got the better of
barbarism. The Celts of antiquity had their Druids, a branch of whose
special profession was the exercise of magic. The Chaldeans and
Egyptians had their wise men, their magicians and their sorcerers. The
negroes have their foretellers of events, their amulets, and their
reporters and believers of miraculous occurrences. A similar race of
men was found by Columbus and the other discoverers of the New World
in America; and facts of a parallel nature are attested to us in the
islands of the South Seas. And, as phenomena of this sort were
universal in their nature, without distinction of climate, whether
torrid or frozen, and independently of the discordant manners and
customs of different countries, so have they been very slow and recent
in their disappearing. Queen Elizabeth sent to consult Dr. John Dee,
the astrologer, respecting a lucky day for her coronation; King James
the First employed much of his learned leisure upon questions of
witchcraft and demonology, in which he fully believed and sir Matthew
Hale in the year 1664 caused two old women to be hanged upon a charge
of unlawful communion with infernal agents.

The history of mankind therefore will be very imperfect, and our
knowledge of the operations and eccentricities of the mind lamentably
deficient, unless we take into our view what has occurred under this
head. The supernatural appearances with which our ancestors conceived
themselves perpetually surrounded must have had a strong tendency to
cherish and keep alive the powers of the imagination, and to penetrate
those who witnessed or expected such things with an extraordinary
sensitiveness. As the course of events appears to us at present, there
is much, though abstractedly within the compass of human sagacity to
foresee, which yet the actors on the scene do not foresee: but the
blindness and perplexity of short-sighted mortals must have been
wonderfully increased, when ghosts and extraordinary appearances were
conceived liable to cross the steps and confound the projects of men
at every turn, and a malicious wizard or a powerful enchanter might
involve his unfortunate victim in a chain of calamities, which no
prudence could disarm, and no virtue could deliver him from. They were
the slaves of an uncontrolable destiny, and must therefore have been
eminently deficient in the perseverance and moral courage, which may
justly be required of us in a more enlightened age. And the men (but
these were few compared with the great majority of mankind), who
believed themselves gifted with supernatural endowments, must have
felt exempt and privileged from common rules, somewhat in the same way
as the persons whom fiction has delighted to pourtray as endowed with
immeasurable wealth, or with the power of rendering themselves
impassive or invisible. But, whatever were their advantages or
disadvantages, at any rate it is good for us to call up in review
things, which are now passed away, but which once occupied so large a
share of the thoughts and attention of mankind, and in a great degree
tended to modify their characters and dictate their resolutions.

As has already been said, numbers of those who were endowed with the
highest powers of human intellect, such as, if they had lived in these
times, would have aspired to eminence in the exact sciences, to the
loftiest flights of imagination, or to the discovery of means by which
the institutions of men in society might be rendered more beneficial
and faultless, at that time wasted the midnight oil in endeavouring to
trace the occult qualities and virtues of things, to render invisible
spirits subject to their command, and to effect those wonders, of
which they deemed themselves to have a dim conception, but which more
rational views of nature have taught us to regard as beyond our power
to effect. These sublime wanderings of the mind are well entitled to
our labour to trace and investigate. The errors of man are worthy to
be recorded, not only as beacons to warn us from the shelves where our
ancestors have made shipwreck, but even as something honourable to our
nature, to show how high a generous ambition could sour, though in
forbidden paths, and in things too wonderful for us.

Nor only is this subject inexpressibly interesting, as setting before
us how the loftiest and most enterprising minds of ancient days
formerly busied themselves. It is also of the highest importance to an
ingenuous curiosity, inasmuch as it vitally affected the fortunes of
so considerable a portion of the mass of mankind. The legislatures of
remote ages bent all their severity at different periods against what
they deemed the unhallowed arts of the sons and daughters of
reprobation. Multitudes of human creatures have been sacrificed in
different ages and countries, upon the accusation of having exercised
arts of the most immoral and sacrilegious character. They were
supposed to have formed a contract with a mighty and invisible spirit,
the great enemy of man, and to have sold themselves, body and soul, to
everlasting perdition, for the sake of gratifying, for a short term of
years, their malignant passions against those who had been so
unfortunate as to give them cause of offence. If there were any
persons who imagined they had entered into such a contract, however
erroneous was their belief, they must of necessity have been greatly
depraved. And it was but natural that such as believed in this crime,
must have considered it as atrocious beyond all others, and have
regarded those who were supposed guilty of it with inexpressible
abhorrence. There are many instances on record, where the persons
accused of it, either from the depth of their delusion, or, which is
more probable, harassed by persecution, by the hatred of their
fellow-creatures directed against them, or by torture, actually
confessed themselves guilty. These instances are too numerous, not to
constitute an important chapter in the legislation of past ages. And,
now that the illusion has in a manner passed away from the face of the
earth, we are on that account the better qualified to investigate this
error in its causes and consequences, and to look back on the tempest
and hurricane from which we have escaped, with chastened feelings, and
a sounder estimate of its nature, its reign, and its effects.




AMBITIOUS NATURE OF MAN


Man is a creature of boundless ambition.

It is probably our natural wants that first awaken us from that
lethargy and indifference in which man may be supposed to be plunged
previously to the impulse of any motive, or the accession of any
uneasiness. One of our earliest wants may be conceived to be hunger,
or the desire of food.

From this simple beginning the history of man in all its complex
varieties may be regarded as proceeding.

Man in a state of society, more especially where there is an
inequality of condition and rank, is very often the creature of
leisure. He finds in himself, either from internal or external
impulse, a certain activity. He finds himself at one time engaged in
the accomplishment of his obvious and immediate desires, and at
another in a state in which these desires have for the present been
fulfilled, and he has no present occasion to repeat those exertions
which led to their fulfilment. This is the period of contemplation.
This is the state which most eminently distinguishes us from the
brutes. Here it is that the history of man, in its exclusive sense,
may be considered as taking its beginning.

Here it is that he specially recognises in himself the sense of power.
Power in its simplest acceptation, may be exerted in either of two
ways, either in his procuring for himself an ample field for more
refined accommodations, or in the exercise of compulsion and authority
over other living creatures. In the pursuit of either of these, and
especially the first, he is led to the attainment of skill and
superior adroitness in the use of his faculties.

No sooner has man reached to this degree of improvement, than now, if
not indeed earlier, he is induced to remark the extreme limitedness of
his faculties in respect to the future; and he is led, first earnestly
to desire a clearer insight into the future, and next a power of
commanding those external causes upon which the events of the future
depend. The first of these desires is the parent of divination, augury,
chiromancy, astrology, and the consultation of oracles; and the second
has been the prolific source of enchantment, witchcraft, sorcery,
magic, necromancy, and alchemy, in its two branches, the unlimited
prolongation of human life, and the art of converting less precious
metals into gold.


HIS DESIRE TO PENETRATE INTO FUTURITY.

Nothing can suggest to us a more striking and stupendous idea of the
faculties of the human mind, than the consideration of the various
arts by which men have endeavoured to penetrate into the future, and
to command the events of the future, in ways that in sobriety and
truth are entirely out of our competence. We spurn impatiently against
the narrow limits which the constitution of things has fixed to our
aspirings, and endeavour by a multiplicity of ways to accomplish that
which it is totally beyond the power of man to effect.


DIVINATION.

Divination has been principally employed in inspecting the entrails of
beasts offered for sacrifice, and from their appearance drawing omens
of the good or ill success of the enterprises in which we are about to
engage.

What the divination by the cup was which Joseph practised, or
pretended to practise, we do not perhaps exactly understand. We all of
us know somewhat of the predictions, to this day resorted to by
maid-servants and others, from the appearance of the sediment to be
found at the bottom of a tea-cup. Predictions of a similar sort are
formed from the unpremeditated way in which we get out of bed in a
morning, or put on our garments, from the persons or things we shall
encounter when we first leave our chamber or go forth in the air, or
any of the indifferent accidents of life.


AUGURY.

Augury has its foundation in observing the flight of birds, the sounds
they utter, their motions whether sluggish or animated, and the
avidity or otherwise with which they appear to take their food. The
college of augurs was one of the most solemn institutions of ancient
Rome.


CHIROMANCY.

Chiromancy, or the art of predicting the various fortunes of the
individual, from an inspection of the minuter variations of the lines
to be found in the palm of the human hand, has been used perhaps at
one time or other in all the nations of the world.


PHYSIOGNOMY.

Physiognomy is not so properly a prediction of future events, as an
attempt to explain the present and inherent qualities of a man. By
unfolding his propensities however, it virtually gave the world to
understand the sort of proceedings in which he was most likely to
engage. The story of Socrates and the physiognomist is sufficiently
known. The physiognomist having inspected the countenance of the
philosopher, pronounced that he was given to intemperance, sensuality,
and violent bursts of passion, all of which was so contrary to his
character as universally known, that his disciples derided the
physiognomist as a vain-glorious pretender. Socrates however presently
put them to silence, by declaring that he had had an original
propensity to all the vices imputed to him, and had only conquered the
propensity by dint of a severe and unremitted self-discipline.


INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS.

Oneirocriticism, or the art of interpreting dreams, seems of all the
modes of prediction the most inseparable from the nature of man. A
considerable portion of every twenty-four hours of our lives is spent
in sleep; and in sleep nothing is at least more usual, than for the
mind to be occupied in a thousand imaginary scenes, which for the time
are as realities, and often excite the passions of the mind of the
sleeper in no ordinary degree. Many of them are wild and rambling; but
many also have a portentous sobriety. Many seem to have a strict
connection with the incidents of our actual lives; and some appear as
if they came for the very purpose to warn us of danger, or prepare us
for coming events. It is therefore no wonder that these occasionally
fill our waking thoughts with a deep interest, and impress upon us an
anxiety of which we feel it difficult to rid ourselves. Accordingly,
in ages when men were more prone to superstition, than at present,
they sometimes constituted a subject of earnest anxiety and
inquisitiveness; and we find among the earliest exercises of the art
of prediction, the interpretation of dreams to have occupied a
principal place, and to have been as it were reduced into a science.


CASTING OF LOTS.

The casting of lots seems scarcely to come within the enumeration here
given. It was intended as an appeal to heaven upon a question involved
in uncertainty, with the idea that the supreme Ruler of the skies,
thus appealed to, would from his omniscience supply the defect of
human knowledge. Two examples, among others sufficiently remarkable,
occur in the Bible. One of Achan, who secreted part of the spoil taken
in Jericho, which was consecrated to the service of God, and who,
being taken by lot, confessed, and was stoned to death. [1] The other
of Jonah, upon whom the lot fell in a mighty tempest, the crew of the
ship enquiring by this means what was the cause of the calamity that
had overtaken them, and Jonah being in consequence cast into the sea.


ASTROLOGY.

Astrology was one of the modes most anciently and universally resorted
to for discovering the fortunes of men and nations. Astronomy and
astrology went hand in hand, particularly among the people of the
East. The idea of fate was most especially bound up in this branch of
prophecy. If the fortune of a man was intimately connected with the
position of the heavenly bodies, it became evident that little was
left to the province of his free will. The stars overruled him in all
his determinations; and it was in vain for him to resist them. There
was something flattering to the human imagination in conceiving that
the planets and the orbs on high were concerned in the conduct we
should pursue, and the events that should befal us. Man resigned
himself to his fate with a solemn, yet a lofty feeling, that the
remotest portions of the universe were concerned in the catastrophe
that awaited him. Beside which, there was something peculiarly
seducing in the apparently profound investigation of the professors of
astrology. They busied themselves with the actual position of the
heavenly bodies, their conjunctions and oppositions; and of
consequence there was a great apparatus of diagrams and calculation to
which they were prompted to apply themselves, and which addressed
itself to the eyes and imaginations of those who consulted them.


ORACLES.

But that which seems to have had the greatest vogue in times of
antiquity, relative to the prediction of future events, is what is
recorded of oracles. Finding the insatiable curiosity of mankind as to
what was to happen hereafter, and the general desire they felt to be
guided in their conduct by an anticipation of things to come, the
priests pretty generally took advantage of this passion, to increase
their emoluments and offerings, and the more effectually to inspire
the rest of their species with veneration and a willing submission to
their authority. The oracle was delivered in a temple, or some sacred
place; and in this particular we plainly discover that mixture of
nature and art, of genuine enthusiasm and contriving craft, which is
so frequently exemplified in the character of man.


DELPHI.

The oracle of Apollo at Delphi is the most remarkable; and respecting
it we are furnished with the greatest body of particulars. The
locality of this oracle is said to have been occasioned by the
following circumstance. A goat-herd fed his flocks on the acclivity of
mount Parnassus. As the animals wandered here and there in pursuit of
food, they happened to approach a deep and long chasm which appeared
in the rock. From this chasm a vapour issued; and the goats had no
sooner inhaled a portion of the vapour, than they began to play and
frisk about with singular agility. The goat-herd, observing this, and
curious to discover the cause, held his head over the chasm; when, in
a short time, the fumes having ascended to his brain, he threw himself
into a variety of strange attitudes, and uttered words, which probably
he did not understand himself, but which were supposed to convey a
prophetic meaning.

This phenomenon was taken advantage of, and a temple to Apollo was
erected on the spot. The credulous many believed that here was
obviously a centre and focus of divine inspiration. On this mountain
Apollo was said to have slain the serpent Python. The apartment of the
oracle was immediately over the chasm from which the vapour issued. A
priestess delivered the responses, who was called Pythia, probably in
commemoration of the exploit which had been performed by Apollo. She
sat upon a tripod, or three-legged stool, perforated with holes, over
the seat of the vapours. After a time, her figure enlarged itself, her
hair stood on end, her complexion and features became altered, her
heart panted and her bosom swelled, and her voice grew more than
human. In this condition she uttered a number of wild and incoherent
phrases, which were supposed to be dictated by the God. The questions
which were offered by those who came to consult the oracle were then
proposed to her, and her answers taken down by the priest, whose
office was to arrange and methodize them, and put them into hexameter
verse, after which they were delivered to the votaries. The priestess
could only be consulted on one day in every month.

Great ingenuity and contrivance were no doubt required to uphold the
credit of the oracle; and no less boldness and self-collectedness on
the part of those by whom the machinery was conducted. Like the
conjurors of modern times, they took care to be extensively informed
as to all such matters respecting which the oracle was likely to be
consulted. They listened probably to the Pythia with a superstitious
reverence for the incoherent sentences she uttered. She, like them,
spent her life in being trained for the office to which she was
devoted. All that was rambling and inapplicable in her wild
declamation they consigned to oblivion. Whatever seemed to bear on the
question proposed they preserved. The persons by whom the responses
were digested into hexameter verse, had of course a commission
attended with great discretionary power. They, as Horace remarks on
another occasion, [2] divided what it was judicious to say, from what
it was prudent to omit, dwelt upon one thing, and slurred over and
accommodated another, just as would best suit the purpose they had in
hand. Beside this, for the most part they clothed the apparent meaning
of the oracle in obscurity, and often devised sentences of ambiguous
interpretation, that might suit with opposite issues, whichever might
happen to fall out. This was perfectly consistent with a high degree
of enthusiasm on the part of the priest. However confident he might be
in some things, he could not but of necessity feel that his
prognostics were surrounded with uncertainty. Whatever decisions of
the oracle were frustrated by the event, and we know that there were
many of this sort, were speedily forgotten; while those which
succeeded, were conveyed from shore to shore, and repeated by every
echo. Nor is it surprising that the transmitters of the sentences of
the God should in time arrive at an extraordinary degree of sagacity
and skill. The oracles accordingly reached to so high a degree of
reputation, that, as Cicero observes, no expedition for a long time
was undertaken, no colony sent out, and often no affair of any
distinguished family or individual entered on, without the previously
obtaining their judgment and sanction. Their authority in a word was
so high, that the first fathers of the Christian church could no
otherwise account for a reputation thus universally received, than by
supposing that the devils were permitted by God Almighty to inform the
oracles with a more than human prescience, that all the world might be
concluded in idolatry and unbelief, [3] and the necessity of a Saviour
be made more apparent. The gullibility of man is one of the most
prominent features of our nature. Various periods and times, when
whole nations have as it were with one consent run into the most
incredible and the grossest absurdities, perpetually offer themselves
in the page of history; and in the records of remote antiquity it
plainly appears that such delusions continued through successive
centuries.


THE DESIRE TO COMMAND AND CONTROL FUTURE EVENTS.

Next to the consideration of those measures by which men have sought
to dive into the secrets of future time, the question presents itself
of those more daring undertakings, the object of which has been by
some supernatural power to control the future, and place it in
subjection to the will of the unlicensed adventurer. Men have always,
especially in ages of ignorance, and when they most felt their
individual weakness, figured to themselves an invisible strength
greater than their own; and, in proportion to their impatience, and
the fervour of their desires, have sought to enter into a league with
those beings whose mightier force might supply that in which their
weakness failed.


COMMERCE WITH THE INVISIBLE WORLD.

It is an essential feature of different ages and countries to vary
exceedingly in the good or ill construction, the fame or dishonour,
which shall attend upon the same conduct or mode of behaviour. In
Egypt and throughout the East, especially in the early periods of
history, the supposed commerce with invisible powers was openly
professed, which, under other circumstances, and during the reign of
different prejudices, was afterwards carefully concealed, and
barbarously hunted out of the pale of allowed and authorised practice.
The Magi of old, who claimed a power of producing miraculous
appearances, and boasted a familiar intercourse with the world of
spirits, were regarded by  their countrymen with peculiar reverence,
and considered as the first and chiefest men in the state. For this
mitigated view of such dark and mysterious proceedings the ancients
were in a great degree indebted to their polytheism. The Romans are
computed to have acknowledged thirty thousand divinities, to all of
whom was rendered a legitimate homage; and other countries in a
similar proportion.


SORCERY AND ENCHANTMENT.

In Asia, however, the Gods were divided into two parties, under
Oromasdes, the principle of good, and Arimanius, the principle of
evil. These powers were in perpetual contention with each other,
sometimes the one, and sometimes the other gaining the superiority.
Arimanius and his legions were therefore scarcely considered as
entitled to the homage of mankind. Those who were actuated by
benevolence, and who desired to draw down blessings upon their
fellow-creatures, addressed themselves to the principle of good; while
such unhappy beings, with whom spite and ill-will had the
predominance, may be supposed often to have invoked in preference the
principle of evil. Hence seems to have originated the idea of sorcery,
or an appeal by incantations and wicked arts to the demons who
delighted in mischief.

These beings rejoiced in the opportunity of inflicting calamity and
misery on mankind. But by what we read of them we might be induced to
suppose that they were in some way restrained from gratifying their
malignant intentions, and waited in eager hope, till some mortal
reprobate should call out their dormant activity, and demand their
aid.

Various enchantments were therefore employed by those unhappy mortals
whose special desire was to bring down calamity and plagues upon the
individuals or tribes of men against whom their animosity was
directed. Unlawful and detested words and mysteries were called into
action to conjure up demons who should yield their powerful and
tremendous assistance. Songs of a wild and maniacal character were
chaunted. Noisome scents and the burning of all unhallowed and odious
things were resorted to. In later times books and formulas of a
terrific character were commonly employed, upon the reading or recital
of which the prodigies resorted to began to display themselves. The
heavens were darkened; the thunder rolled; and fierce and blinding
lightnings flashed from one corner of the heavens to the other. The
earth quaked and rocked from side to side. All monstrous and deformed
things shewed themselves, "Gorgons, and Hydras, and Chimeras dire,"
enough to cause the stoutest heart to quail. Lastly, devils, whose
name was legion, and to whose forms and distorted and menacing
countenances superstition had annexed the most frightful ideas,
crowded in countless multitudes upon the spectator, whose breath was
flame, whose dances were full of terror, and whose strength infinitely
exceeded every thing human. Such were the appalling conceptions which
ages of bigotry and ignorance annexed to the notion of sorcery, and
with these they scared the unhappy beings over whom this notion had
usurped an ascendancy into lunacy, and prepared them for the
perpetrating flagitious and unheard-of deeds.

The result of these horrible incantations was not less tremendous,
than the preparations might have led us to expect. The demons
possessed all the powers of the air, and produced tempests and
shipwrecks at their pleasure. "Castles toppled on their warder's
heads, and palaces and pyramids sloped their summits to their
foundations;" forests and mountains were torn from their roots, and
cast into the sea. They inflamed the passions of men, and caused them
to commit the most unheard-of excesses. They laid their ban on those
who enjoyed the most prosperous health, condemned them to peak and
pine, wasted them into a melancholy atrophy, and finally consigned
them to a premature grave. They breathed a new and unblest life into
beings in whom existence had long been extinct, and by their hateful
and resistless power caused the sepulchres to give up their dead.


WITCHCRAFT.

Next to sorcery we may recollect the case of witchcraft, which occurs
oftener, particularly in modern times, than any other alleged mode of
changing by supernatural means the future course of events. The
sorcerer, as we shall see hereafter, was frequently a man of learning
and intellectual abilities, sometimes of comparative opulence and
respectable situation in society. But the witch or wizard was almost
uniformly old, decrepid, and nearly or altogether in a state of
penury. The functions however of the witch and the sorcerer were in a
great degree the same. The earliest account of a witch, attended with
any degree of detail, is that of the witch of Endor in the Bible, who
among other things, professed the power of calling up the dead upon
occasion from the peace of the sepulchre. Witches also claimed the
faculty of raising storms, and in various ways disturbing the course
of nature. They appear in most cases to have been brought into action
by the impulse of private malice. They occasioned mortality of greater
or less extent in man and beast. They blighted the opening prospect of
a plentiful harvest. They covered the heavens with clouds, and sent
abroad withering and malignant blasts. They undermined the health of
those who were so unfortunate as to incur their animosity, and caused
them to waste away gradually with incurable disease. They were
notorious two or three centuries ago for the power of the "evil eye."
The vulgar, both great and small, dreaded their displeasure, and
sought, by small gifts, and fair speeches, but insincere, and the
offspring of terror only, to avert the pernicious consequences of
their malice. They were famed for fabricating small images of wax, to
represent the object of their persecution; and, as these by gradual
and often studiously protracted degrees wasted before the fire, so the
unfortunate butts of their resentment perished with a lingering, but
inevitable death.


COMPACTS WITH THE DEVIL.

The power of these witches, as we find in their earliest records,
originated in their intercourse with "familiar spirits," invisible
beings who must be supposed to be enlisted in the armies of the prince
of darkness. We do not read in these ancient memorials of any league
of mutual benefit entered into between the merely human party, and his
or her supernatural assistant. But modern times have amply supplied
this defect. The witch or sorcerer could not secure the assistance of
the demon but by a sure and faithful compact, by which the human party
obtained the industrious and vigilant service of his familiar for a
certain term of years, only on condition that, when the term was
expired, the demon of undoubted right was to obtain possession of the
indentured party, and to convey him irremissibly and for ever to the
regions of the damned. The contract was drawn out in authentic form,
signed by the sorcerer, and attested with his blood, and was then
carried away by the demon, to be produced again at the appointed time.


IMPS.

These familiar spirits often assumed the form of animals, and a black
dog or cat was considered as a figure in which the attendant devil was
secretly hidden. These subordinate devils were called Imps. Impure and
carnal ideas were mingled with these theories. The witches were said
to have preternatural teats from which their familiars sucked their
blood. The devil also engaged in sexual intercourse with the witch or
wizard, being denominated _incubus_, if his favourite were a
woman, and _succubus_, if a man. In short, every frightful and
loathsome idea was carefully heaped up together, to render the
unfortunate beings to whom the crime of witchcraft was imputed the
horror and execration of their species.


TALISMANS AND AMULETS.

As according to the doctrine of witchcraft, there were certain
compounds, and matters prepared by rules of art, that proved baleful
and deadly to the persons against whom their activity was directed, so
there were also preservatives, talismans, amulets and charms, for the
most [Errata: _read_ for the most part] to be worn about the
person, which rendered him superior to injury, not only from the
operations of witchcraft, but in some cases from the sword or any
other mortal weapon. As the poet says, he that had this,

  Might trace huge forests and unhallowed heaths,--
  Yea there, where very desolation dwells,
  By grots and caverns shagged with horrid shades,

nay, in the midst of every tremendous assailant, "might pass on with
unblenched majesty," uninjured and invulnerable.


NECROMANCY.

Last of all we may speak of necromancy, which has something in it that
so strongly takes hold of the imagination, that, though it is one only
of the various modes which have been enumerated for the exorcise of
magical power, we have selected it to give a title to the present
volume.

There is something sacred to common apprehension in the repose of the
dead. They seem placed beyond our power to disturb. "There is no work,
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave."

  After life's fitful fever they sleep well:
  Nor steel, nor poison,
  Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing,
  Can touch them further.

Their remains moulder in the earth. Neither form nor feature is long
continued to them. We shrink from their touch, and their sight. To
violate the sepulchre therefore for the purpose of unholy spells and
operations, as we read of in the annals of witchcraft, cannot fail to
be exceedingly shocking. To call up the spirits of the departed, after
they have fulfilled the task of life, and are consigned to their final
sleep, is sacrilegious. Well may they exclaim, like the ghost of
Samuel in the sacred story, "Why hast thou disquieted me?"

There is a further circumstance in the case, which causes us
additionally to revolt from the very idea of necromancy, strictly so
called. Man is a mortal, or an immortal being. His frame either wholly
"returns to the earth as it was, or his spirit," the thinking
principle within him, "to God who gave it." The latter is the
prevailing sentiment of mankind in modern times. Man is placed upon
earth in a state of probation, to be dealt with hereafter according to
the deeds done in the flesh. "Some shall go away into everlasting
punishment; and others into life eternal." In this case there is
something blasphemous in the idea of intermedding with the state of
the dead. We must leave them in the hands of God. Even on the idea of
an interval, the "sleep of the soul" from death to the general
resurrection, which is the creed of no contemptible sect of
Christians, it is surely a terrific notion that we should disturb the
pause, which upon that hypothesis, the laws of nature have assigned to
the departed soul, and come to awake, or to "torment him before the
time."


ALCHEMY.

To make our catalogue of supernatural doings, and the lawless
imaginations of man, the more complete, it may be further necessary to
refer to the craft, so eagerly cultivated in successive ages of the
world of converting the inferior metals into gold, to which was
usually joined the _elixir vitae_, or universal medicine, having
the quality of renewing the youth of man, and causing him to live for
ever. The first authentic record on this subject is an edict of
Dioclesian about three hundred years after Christ, ordering a diligent
search to be made in Egypt for all the ancient books which treated of
the art of making gold and silver, that they might without distinction
be consigned to the flames. This edict however necessarily presumes a
certain antiquity to the pursuit; and fabulous history has recorded
Solomon, Pythagoras and Hermes among its distinguished votaries. From
this period the study seems to have slept, till it was revived among
the Arabians after a lapse of five or six hundred years.

It is well known however how eagerly it was cultivated in various
countries of the world for many centuries after it was divulged by
Geber. Men of the most wonderful talents devoted their lives to the
investigation; and in multiplied instances the discovery was said to
have been completed. Vast sums of money were consumed in the fruitless
endeavour; and in a later period it seems to have furnished an
excellent handle to vain and specious projectors, to extort money from
those more amply provided with the goods of fortune than themselves.

The art no doubt is in itself sufficiently mystical, having been
pursued by multitudes, who seemed to themselves ever on the eve of
consummation, but as constantly baffled when to their own apprehension
most on the verge of success. The discovery indeed appears upon the
face of it to be of the most delicate nature, as the benefit must
wholly depend upon its being reserved to one or a very few, the object
being unbounded wealth, which is nothing unless confined. If the power
of creating gold is diffused, wealth by such diffusion becomes
poverty, and every thing after a short time would but return to what
it had been. Add to which, that the nature of discovery has ordinarily
been, that, when once the clue has been found, it reveals itself to
several about the same period of time.

The art, as we have said, is in its own nature sufficiently mystical,
depending on nice combinations and proportions of ingredients, and
upon the addition of each ingredient being made exactly in the
critical moment, and in the precise degree of heat, indicated by the
colour of the vapour arising from the crucible or retort. This was
watched by the operator with inexhaustible patience; and it was often
found or supposed, that the minutest error in this respect caused the
most promising appearances to fail of the expected success. This
circumstance no doubt occasionally gave an opportunity to an artful
impostor to account for his miscarriage, and thus to prevail upon his
credulous dupe to enable him to begin his tedious experiment again.

But, beside this, it appears that those whose object was the
transmutation of metals, very frequently joined to this pursuit the
study of astrology, and even the practice of sorcery. So much delicacy
and nicety were supposed to be required in the process for the
transmutation of metals, that it could not hope to succeed but under a
favourable conjunction of the planets; and the most flourishing
pretenders to the art boasted that they had also a familiar
intercourse with certain spirits of supernatural power, which assisted
them in their undertakings, and enabled them to penetrate into things
undiscoverable to mere human sagacity, and to predict future events.


FAIRIES.

Another mode in which the wild and erratic imagination of our
ancestors manifested itself, was in the creation of a world of
visionary beings of a less terrific character, but which did not fail
to annoy their thoughts, and perplex their determinations, known by
the name of Fairies.

There are few things more worthy of contemplation, and that at the
same time tend to place the dispositions of our ancestors in a more
amiable point of view, than the creation of this airy and fantastic
race. They were so diminutive as almost to elude the organs of human
sight. They were at large, even though confined to the smallest
dimensions. They "could be bounded in a nutshell, and count themselves
kings of infinite space."

  Their midnight revels, by a forest-side
  Or fountain, the belated peasant saw,
  Or dreamed he saw, while overhead the moon
  Sat arbitress, and nearer to the earth
  Wheeled her pale course--they, on their mirth and dance
  Intent, with jocund music charmed his ear;
  At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.

Small circles marked the grass in solitary places, the trace of their
little feet, which, though narrow, were ample enough to afford every
accommodation to their pastime.

The fairy tribes appear to have been every where distinguished for
their patronage of truth, simplicity and industry, and their
abhorrence of sensuality and prevarication. They left little rewards
in secret, as tokens of their approbation of the virtues they loved,
and by their supernatural power afforded a supplement to pure and
excellent intentions, when the corporeal powers of the virtuous sank
under the pressure of human infirmity. Where they conceived
displeasure, the punishments they inflicted were for the most part
such as served moderately to vex and harass the offending party,
rather than to inflict upon him permanent and irremediable evils.

  Their airy tongues would syllable men's names
  On sands, and shores, and desert wildernesses.

They were supposed to guide the wandering lights, that in the
obscurity of the night beguiled the weary traveller "through bog,
through bush, through brake, through briar." But their power of evil
only extended, or was only employed, to vex those who by a certain
obliquity of conduct gave occasion for their reproofs. They besides
pinched and otherwise tormented the objects of their displeasure; and,
though the mischiefs they executed were not of the most vital kind,
yet, coming from a supernatural enemy, and being inflicted by
invisible hands, they could not fail greatly to disturb and disorder
those who suffered from them.

There is at first sight a great inconsistency in the representations
of these imaginary people. For the most part they are described to us
as of a stature and appearance, almost too slight to be marked by our
grosser human organs. At other times however, and especially in the
extremely popular tales digested by M. Perrault, they shew themselves
in indiscriminate assemblies, brought together for some solemn
festivity or otherwise, and join the human frequenters of the scene,
without occasioning enquiry or surprise. They are particularly
concerned in the business of summarily and without appeal bestowing
miraculous gifts, sometimes as a mark of special friendship and
favour, and sometimes with a malicious and hostile intention.--But we
are to consider that spirits

  Can every form assume; so soft
  And uncompounded is their essence pure;
  Not tied or manacled with joint or limb,
  Like cumbrous flesh; but, in what shape they choose,
  Dilated or condensed, bright or obscure,
  Can execute their airy purposes,
  And works of love or enmity fulfil.

And then again, as their bounties were shadowy, so were they specially
apt to disappear in a moment, the most splendid palaces and
magnificent exhibitions vanishing away, and leaving their disconcerted
dupe with his robes converted into the poorest rags, and, instead of
glittering state, finding himself suddenly in the midst of desolation,
and removed no man knew whither.

One of the mischiefs that were most frequently imputed to them, was
the changing the beautiful child of some doating parents, for a babe
marked with ugliness and deformity. But this idea seems fraught with
inconsistency. The natural stature of the fairy is of the smallest
dimensions; and, though they could occasionally dilate their figure so
as to imitate humanity, yet it is to be presumed that this was only
for a special purpose, and, that purpose obtained, that they shrank
again habitually into their characteristic littleness. The change
therefore can only be supposed to have been of one human child for
another.


ROSICRUCIANS.

Nothing very distinct has been ascertained respecting a sect, calling
itself Rosicrucians. It is said to have originated in the East from
one of the crusaders in the fourteenth century; but it attracted at
least no public notice till the beginning of the seventeenth century.
Its adherents appear to have imbibed their notions from the Arabians,
and claimed the possession of the philosopher's stone, the art of
transmuting metals, and the _elixir vitae_.


SYLPHS AND GNOMES, SALAMANDERS AND UNDINES.

But that for which they principally excited public attention, was
their creed respecting certain elementary beings, which to grosser
eyes are invisible, but were familiarly known to the initiated. To be
admitted to their acquaintance it was previously necessary that the
organs of human sight should be purged by the universal medicine, and
that certain glass globes should be chemically prepared with one or
other of the four elements, and for one month exposed to the beams of
the sun. These preliminary steps being taken, the initiated
immediately had a sight of innumerable beings of a luminous substance,
but of thin and evanescent structure, that people the elements on all
sides of us. Those who inhabited the air were called Sylphs; and those
who dwelt in the earth bore the name of Gnomes; such as peopled the
fire were Salamanders; and those who made their home in the waters
were Undines. Each class appears to have had an extensive power in the
elements to which they belonged. They could raise tempests in the air,
and storms at sea, shake the earth, and alarm the inhabitants of the
globe with the sight of devouring flames. These appear however to have
been more formidable in appearance than in reality. And the whole race
was subordinate to man, and particularly subject to the initiated. The
gnomes, inhabitants of the earth and the mines, liberally supplied to
the human beings with whom they conversed, the hidden treasures over
which they presided. The four classes were some of them male, and some
female; but the female sex seems to have preponderated in all.

These elementary beings, we are told, were by their constitution more
long-lived than man, but with this essential disadvantage, that at
death they wholly ceased to exist. In the mean time they were inspired
with an earnest desire for immortality; and there was one way left for
them, by which this desire might be gratified. If they were so happy
as to awaken in any of the initiated a passion the end of which was
marriage, then the sylph who became the bride of a virtuous man,
followed his nature, and became immortal; while on the other hand, if
she united herself to an immoral being and a profligate, the husband
followed the law of the wife, and was rendered entirely mortal. The
initiated however were required, as a condition to their being
admitted into the secrets of the order, to engage themselves in a vow
of perpetual chastity as to women. And they were abundantly rewarded
by the probability of being united to a sylph, a gnome, a salamander,
or an undine, any one of whom was inexpressibly more enchanting than
the most beautiful woman, in addition to which her charms were in a
manner perpetual, while a wife of our own nature is in a short time
destined to wrinkles, and all the other disadvantages of old age. The
initiated of course enjoyed a beatitude infinitely greater than that
which falls to the lot of ordinary mortals, being conscious of a
perpetual commerce with these wonderful beings from whose society the
vulgar are debarred, and having such associates unintermittedly
anxious to perform their behests, and anticipate their desires. [4]

We should have taken but an imperfect survey of the lawless
extravagancies of human imagination, if we had not included a survey
of this sect. There is something particularly soothing to the fancy of
an erratic mind, in the conception of being conversant with a race of
beings the very existence of which is unperceived by ordinary mortals,
and thus entering into an infinitely numerous and variegated society,
even when we are apparently swallowed up in entire solitude.

The Rosicrucians are further entitled to our special notice, as their
tenets have had the good fortune to furnish Pope with the beautiful
machinery with which he has adorned the Rape of the Lock. There is
also, of much later date, a wild and poetical fiction for which we are
indebted to the same source, called Undine, from the pen of Lamotte
Fouquet.




EXAMPLES OF NECROMANCY AND WITCHCRAFT FROM THE BIBLE.


The oldest and most authentic record from which we can derive our
ideas on the subject of necromancy and witchcraft, unquestionably is
the Bible. The Egyptians and Chaldeans were early distinguished for
their supposed proficiency in magic, in the production of supernatural
phenomena, and in penetrating into the secrets of future time. The
first appearance of men thus extraordinarily gifted, or advancing
pretensions of this sort, recorded in Scripture, is on occasion of
Pharoah's dream of the seven years of plenty, and seven years of
famine. At that period the king "sent and called for all the magicians
of Egypt and all the wise men; but they could not interpret the
dream," [5] which Joseph afterwards expounded.

Their second appearance was upon a most memorable occasion, when Moses
and Aaron, armed with miraculous powers, came to a subsequent king of
Egypt, to demand from him that their countrymen might be permitted to
depart to another tract of the world. They produced a miracle as the
evidence of their divine mission: and the king, who was also named
Pharoah, "called before him the wise men and the sorcerers of Egypt,
who with their enchantments did in like manner" as Moses had done;
till, after some experiments in which they were apparently successful,
they at length were compelled to allow themselves overcome, and fairly
to confess to their master, "This is the finger of God!" [6]

The spirit of the Jewish history loudly affirms, that the Creator of
heaven and earth had adopted this nation for his chosen people, and
therefore demanded their exclusive homage, and that they should
acknowledge no other God. It is on this principle that it is made one
of his early commands to them, "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to
live." [7] And elsewhere the meaning of this prohibition is more fully
explained: "There shall not be found among you any one that useth
divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch, or a
charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a
necromancer: [8] these shall surely be put to death; they shall stone
them with stones." [9]

The character of an enchanter is elsewhere more fully illustrated in
the case of Balaam, the soothsayer, who was sent for by Balak, the
king of Moab, that he might "curse the people of Israel. The
messengers of the king came to Balaam with the rewards of divination
in their hand;" [10] but the soothsayer was restrained from his
purpose by the God of the Jews, and, where he came to curse, was
compelled to bless. He therefore "did not go, as at other times, to
seek for enchantments," [11] but took up his discourse, and began,
saying, "Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is
there any divination against Israel!" [12]

Another example of necromantic power or pretension is to be found in
the story of Saul and the witch of Endor. Saul, the first king of the
Jews, being rejected by God, and obtaining "no answer to his
enquiries, either by dreams, or by prophets, said to his servants,
seek me a woman that has a familiar spirit. And his servants, said,
Lo, there is a woman that has a familiar spirit at Endor." Saul
accordingly had recourse to her. But, previously to this time, in
conformity to the law of God, he "had cut off those that had familiar
spirits, and the wizards out of the land;" and the woman therefore was
terrified at his present application. Saul re-assured her; and in
consequence the woman consented to call up the person he should name.
Saul demanded of her to bring up the ghost of Samuel. The ghost,
whether by her enchantments or through divine interposition we are not
told, appeared, and prophesied to Saul, that he and his son should
fall in battle on the succeeding day, [13] which accordingly came to
pass.

Manasseh, a subsequent king in Jerusalem, "observed times, and used
enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits and wizards, and so
provoked God to anger." [14]

It appears plainly from the same authority, that there were good
spirits and evil spirits, "The Lord said, Who shall persuade Ahab,
that he may go up, and fall before Ramoth Gilead? And there came a
spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will persuade him: I
will go forth, and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.
And the Lord said, Thou shall persuade him." [15]

In like manner, we are told, "Satan stood up against Israel, and
provoked David to number the people; and God was displeased with the
thing, and smote Israel, so that there fell of the people seventy
thousand men." [16]

Satan also, in the Book of Job, presented himself before the Lord
among the Sons of God, and asked and obtained leave to try the
faithfulness of Job by "putting forth his hand," and despoiling the
patriarch of "all that he had."

Taking these things into consideration, there can be no reasonable
doubt, though the devil and Satan are not mentioned in the story, that
the serpent who in so crafty a way beguiled Eve, was in reality no
other than the malevolent enemy of mankind under that disguise.

We are in the same manner informed of the oracles of the false Gods;
and an example occurs of a king of Samaria, who fell sick, and who
"sent messengers, and said to them, Go, and enquire of Baalzebub, the
God of Ekron, whether I shall recover of this disease." At which
proceeding the God of the Jews was displeased, and sent Elijah to the
messengers to say, "Is it because there is not a God in Israel, that
you go to enquire of Baalzebub, the God of Ekron? Because the king has
done this, he shall not recover; he shall surely die." [17]

The appearance of the Wise Men of the East again occurs in considerable
detail in the Prophecy of Daniel, though they are only brought forward
there, as discoverers of hidden things, and interpreters of dreams.
Twice, on occasion of dreams that troubled him, Nebuchadnezzar, king
of Babylon, "commanded to be called to him the magicians, and the
astrologers, and the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans" of his kingdom, and
each time with similar success. They confessed their incapacity; and
Daniel, the prophet of the Jews, expounded to the king that in which
they had failed. Nebuchadnezzar in consequence promoted Daniel to be
master of the magicians. A similar scene occurred in the court of
Belshazzar, the son of Nebuchadnezzar, in the case of the hand-writing
on the wall.

It is probable that the Jews considered the Gods of the nations around
them as so many of the fallen angels, or spirits of hell, since, among
other arguments, the coincidence of the name of Beelzebub, the prince
of devils, [18] with Baalzebub, the God of Ekron, could scarcely have
fallen out by chance.

It seemed necessary to enter into these particulars, as they occur in
the oldest and most authentic records from which we can derive our
ideas on the subject of necromancy, witchcraft, and the claims that
were set up in ancient times to the exercise of magcial power. Among
these examples there is only one, that of the contention for
superiority between Moses and the Wise Men of Egypt in which we are
presented with their pretensions to a visible exhibition of
supernatural effects.


THE MAGI, OR WISE MEN OF THE EAST.

The Magi, or Wise Men of the East, extended their ramifications over
Egypt, Babylonia, Persia, India, and probably, though with a different
name, over China, and indeed the whole known world. Their profession
was of a mysterious nature. They laid claim to a familiar intercourse
with the Gods. They placed themselves as mediators between heaven and
earth, assumed the prerogative of revealing the will of beings of a
nature superior to man, and pretended to show wonders and prodigies
that surpassed any power which was merely human.

To understand this, we must bear in mind the state of knowledge in
ancient times, where for the most part the cultivation of the mind,
and an acquaintance with either science or art, were confined to a
very small part of the population. In each of the nations we have
mentioned, there was a particular caste or tribe of men, who, by the
prerogative of their birth, were entitled to the advantages of science
and a superior education, while the rest of their countrymen were
destined to subsist by manual labour. This of necessity gave birth in
the privileged few to an overweening sense of their own importance.
They scarcely regarded the rest of their countrymen as beings of the
same species with themselves; and, finding a strong line of distinction
cutting them off from the herd, they had recourse to every practicable
method for making that distinction still stronger. Wonder is one of
the most obvious means of generating deference; and, by keeping to
themselves the grounds and process of their skill, and presenting the
results only, they were sure to excite the admiration and reverence of
their contemporaries. This mode of proceeding further produced a
re-action upon themselves. That which supplied and promised to supply
to them so large a harvest of honour and fame, unavoidably became
precious in their eyes. They pursued their discoveries with avidity,
because few had access to their opportunities in that respect, and
because, the profounder were their researches, the more sure they were
of being looked up to by the public as having that in them which was
sacred and inviolable. They spent their days and nights in these
investigations. They shrank from no privation and labour. At the same
time that in these labours they had at all times an eye to their
darling object, an ascendancy over the minds of their countrymen at
large, and the extorting from them a blind and implicit deference to
their oracular decrees. They however loved their pursuits for the
pursuits themselves. They felt their abstraction and their unlimited
nature, and on that account contemplated them with admiration. They
valued them (for such is the indestructible character of the human
mind) for the pains they had bestowed on them. The sweat of their brow
grew into a part as it were of the intrinsic merit of the articles;
and that which had with so much pains been attained by them, they
could not but regard as of inestimable worth.


EGYPT.

The Egyptians took the lead in early antiquity, with respect to
civilisation and the stupendous productions of human labour and art,
of all other known nations of the world. The pyramids stand by
themselves as a monument of the industry of mankind. Thebes, with her
hundred gates, at each of which we are told she could send out at once
two hundred chariots and ten thousand warriors completely accoutred,
was one of the noblest cities on record. The whole country of Lower
Egypt was intersected with canals giving a beneficent direction to the
periodical inundations of the Nile; and the artificial lake Moeris was
dug of a vast extent, that it might draw off the occasional excesses
of the overflowings of the river. The Egyptians had an extraordinary
custom of preserving their dead, so that the country was peopled
almost as numerously with mummies prepared by extreme assiduity and
skill, as with the living.

And, in proportion to their edifices and labours of this durable sort,
was their unwearied application to all the learning that was then
known. Geometry is said to have owed its existence to the necessity
under which they were placed of every man recognising his own property
in land, as soon as the overflowings of the Nile had ceased. They were
not less assiduous in their application to astronomy. The hieroglyphics
of Egypt are of universal notoriety. Their mythology was of the most
complicated nature. Their Gods were infinitely varied in their kind;
and the modes of their worship not less endlessly diversified. All
these particulars still contributed to the abstraction of their
studies, and the loftiness of their pretensions to knowledge. They
perpetually conversed with the invisible world, and laid claim to the
faculty of revealing things hidden, of foretelling future events, and
displaying wonders that exceeded human power to produce.

A striking illustration of the state of Egypt in that respect in early
times, occurs incidentally in the history of Joseph in the Bible. Jacob
had twelve sons, among whom his partiality for Joseph was so notorious,
that his brethren out of envy sold him as a slave to the wandering
Midianites. Thus it was his fortune to be placed in Egypt, where in
the process of events he became the second man in the country, and
chief minister of the king. A severe famine having visited these
climates, Jacob sent his sons into Egypt to buy corn, where only it
was to be found. As soon as Joseph saw them, he knew them, though they
knew not him in his exalted situation; and he set himself to devise
expedients to settle them permanently in the country in which he
ruled. Among the rest he caused a precious cup from his stores to be
privily conveyed into the corn-sack of Benjamin, his only brother by
the same mother. The brothers were no sooner departed, than Joseph
sent in pursuit of them; and the messengers accosted them with the
words, "Is not this the cup in which my lord drinketh, and whereby
also he divineth? Ye have done evil in taking it away." [19] They
brought the strangers again into the presence of Joseph, who addressed
them with severity, saying, "What is this deed that ye have done? Wot
ye not that such a man as I could certainly divine?" [20]

From this story it plainly appears, that the art of divination was
extensively exercised in Egypt, that the practice was held in honour,
and that such was the state of the country, that it was to be presumed
as a thing of course, that a man of the high rank and distinction of
Joseph should professedly be an adept in it.

In the great contention for supernatural power between Moses and the
magicians of Egypt, it is plain that they came forward with confidence,
and did not shrink from the debate. Moses's rod was turned into a
serpent; so were their rods: Moses changed the waters of Egypt into
blood; and the magicians did the like with their enchantments: Moses
caused frogs to come up, and cover the land of Egypt; and the magicians
also brought frogs upon the country. Without its being in any way
necessary to enquire how they effected these wonders, it is evident
from the whole train of the narrative, that they must have been much
in the practice of astonishing their countrymen with their feats in
such a kind, and, whether it were delusion, or to whatever else we may
attribute their success, that they were universally looked up to for
the extraordinariness of their performances.

While we are on this subject of illustrations from the Bible, it may
be worth while to revert more particularly to the story of Balaam.
Balak the king of Moab, sent for Balaam that he might come and curse
the invaders of his country; and in the sequel we are told, when the
prophet changed his curses into a blessing, that he did not "go forth,
as at other times, to seek for enchantments." It is plain therefore
that Balak did not rely singly upon the eloquence and fervour of
Balaam to pour out vituperations upon the people of Israel, but that
it was expected that the prophet should use incantations and certain
mystical rites, upon which the efficacy of his foretelling disaster
to the enemy principally depended.


STATUE OF MEMNON.

The Magi of Egypt looked round in every quarter for phenomena that
might produce astonishment among their countrymen, and induce them to
believe that they dwelt in a land which overflowed with the testimonies
and presence of a divine power. Among others the statue of Memnon,
erected over his tomb near Thebes, is recorded by many authors. Memnon
is said to have been the son of Aurora, the Goddess of the morning;
and his statue is related to have had the peculiar faculty of uttering
a melodious sound every morning when touched by the first beams of
day, as if to salute his mother; and every night at sunset to have
imparted another sound, low and mournful, as lamenting the departure
of the day. This prodigy is spoken of by Tacitus, Strabo, Juvenal and
Philostratus. The statue uttered these sounds, while perfect; and,
when it was mutilated by human violence, or by a convulsion of nature,
it still retained the property with which it had been originally
endowed. Modern travellers, for the same phenomenon has still been
observed, have asserted that it does not owe its existence to any
prodigy, but to a property of the granite, of which the statue or its
pedestal is formed, which, being hollow, is found in various parts of
the world to exhibit this quality. It has therefore been suggested,
that the priests, having ascertained its peculiarity, expressly formed
the statue of that material, for the purpose of impressing on it a
supernatural character, and thus being enabled to extend their
influence with a credulous people. [21]


TEMPLE OF JUPITER AMMON: ITS ORACLES.

Another of what may be considered as the wonders of Egypt, is the
temple of Jupiter Ammon in the midst of the Great Desert. This temple
was situated at a distance of no less than twelve days' journey from
Memphis, the capital of the Lower Egypt. The principal part of this
space consisted of one immense tract of moving sand, so hot as to be
intolerable to the sole of the foot, while the air was pregnant with
fire, so that it was almost impossible to breathe in it. Not a drop of
water, not a tree, not a blade of grass, was to be found through this
vast surface. It was here that Cambyses, engaged in an impious
expedition to demolish the temple, is said to have lost an army of
fifty thousand men, buried in the sands. When you arrived however,
you were presented with a wood of great circumference, the foliage of
which was so thick that the beams of the sun could not pierce it. The
atmosphere of the place was of a delicious temperature; the scene was
every where interspersed with fountains; and all the fruits of the
earth were found in the highest perfection. In the midst was the
temple and oracle of the God, who was worshipped in the likeness of a
ram. The Egyptian priests chose this site as furnishing a test of the
zeal of their votaries; the journey being like the pilgrimage to
Jerusalem or Mecca, if not from so great a distance, yet attended in
many respects with perils more formidable. It was not safe to attempt
the passage but with moderate numbers, and those expressly equipped
for expedition.

Bacchus is said to have visited this spot in his great expedition to
the East, when Jupiter appeared to him in the form of a ram, having
struck his foot upon the soil, and for the first time occasioned that
supply of water, with which the place was ever after plentifully
supplied. Alexander the Great in a subsequent age undertook the same
journey with his army, that he might cause himself to be acknowledged
for the son of the God, under which character he was in all due form
recognised. The priests no doubt had heard of the successful battles
of the Granicus and of Issus, of the capture of Tyre after a seven
months' siege, and of the march of the great conqueror in Egypt, where
he carried every thing before him.

Here we are presented with a striking specimen of the mode and spirit
in which the oracles of old were accustomed to be conducted. It may be
said that the priests were corrupted by the rich presents which
Alexander bestowed on them with a liberal hand. But this was not the
prime impulse in the business. They were astonished at the daring with
which Alexander with a comparative handful of men set out from Greece,
having meditated the overthrow of the great Persian empire. They were
astonished with his perpetual success, and his victorious progress
from the Hellespont to mount Taurus, from mount Taurus to Pelusium,
and from Pelusium quite across the ancient kingdom of Egypt to the
Palus Mareotis. Accustomed to the practice of adulation, and to the
belief that mortal power and true intellectual greatness were the
same, they with a genuine enthusiastic fervour regarded Alexander as
the son of their God, and acknowledged him as such.--Nothing can be
more memorable than the way in which belief and unbelief hold a
divided empire over the human mind, our passions hurrying us into
belief, at the same time that our intervals of sobriety suggest to
us that it is all pure imposition.


CHALDEA AND BABYLON.

The history of the Babylonish monarchy not having been handed down to
us, except incidentally as it is touched upon by the historians of
other countries, we know little of those anecdotes respecting it which
are best calculated to illustrate the habits and manners of a people.
We know that they in probability preceded all other nations in the
accuracy of their observations on the phenomena of the heavenly
bodies. We know that the Magi were highly respected among them as an
order in the state; and that, when questions occurred exciting great
alarm in the rulers, "the magicians, the astrologers, the sorcerers,
and the Chaldeans," were called together, to see whether by their arts
they could throw light upon questions so mysterious and perplexing,
and we find sufficient reason, both from analogy, and from the very
circumstance that sorcerers are specifically named among the classes
of which their Wise Men consisted, to believe that the Babylonian Magi
advanced no dubious pretensions to the exercise of magical power.


ZOROASTER.

Among the Chaldeans the most famous name is that of Zoroaster, who is
held to have been the author of their religion, their civil policy,
their sciences, and their magic. He taught the doctrine of two great
principles, the one the author of good, the other of evil. He
prohibited the use of images in the ceremonies of religion, and
pronounced that nothing deserved homage but fire, and the sun, the
centre and the source of fire, and these perhaps to be venerated not
for themselves, but as emblematical of the principle of all good
things. He taught astronomy and astrology. We may with sufficient
probability infer his doctrines from those of the Magi, who were his
followers. He practised enchantments, by means of which he would send
a panic among the forces that were brought to make war against him,
rendering the conflict by force of arms unnecessary. He prescribed the
use of certain herbs as all-powerful for the production of supernatural
effects. He pretended to the faculty of working miracles, and of
superseding and altering the ordinary course of nature.--There was,
beside the Chaldean Zoroaster, a Persian known by the same name, who
is said to have been a contemporary of Darius Hystaspes.




GREECE.


Thus obscure and general is our information respecting the
Babylonians. But it was far otherwise with the Greeks. Long before
the period, when, by their successful resistance to the Persian
invasion, they had rendered themselves of paramount importance in the
history of the civilised world, they had their poets and annalists,
who preserved to future time the memory of their tastes, their manners
and superstitions, their strength, and their weakness. Homer in
particular had already composed his two great poems, rendering the
peculiarities of his countrymen familiar to the latest posterity. The
consequence of this is, that the wonderful things of early Greece are
even more frequent than the record of its sober facts. As men advance
in observation and experience, they are compelled more and more to
perceive that all the phenomena of nature are one vast chain of
uninterrupted causes and consequences: but to the eye of uninstructed
ignorance every thing is astonishing, every thing is unexpected. The
remote generations of mankind are in all cases full of prodigies: but
it is the fortune of Greece to have preserved its early adventures, so
as to render the beginning pages of its history one mass of impossible
falsehoods.


DEITIES OF GREECE.

The Gods of the Greeks appear all of them once to have been men. Their
real or supposed adventures therefore make a part of what is recorded
respecting them. Jupiter was born in Crete, and being secreted by his
mother in a cave, was suckled by a goat. Being come to man's estate,
he warred with the giants, one of whom had an hundred hands, and two
others brethren, grew nine inches every month, and, when nine years
old, were fully qualified to engage in all exploits of corporeal
strength. The war was finished, by the giants being overwhelmed with
the thunderbolts of heaven, and buried under mountains.

Minerva was born from the head of her father, without a mother; and
Bacchus, coming into the world after the death of his female parent,
was inclosed in the thigh of Jupiter, and was thus produced at the
proper time in full vigour and strength. Minerva had a shield, in
which was preserved the real head of Medusa, that had the property of
turning every one that looked on it into stone. Bacchus, when a child,
was seized on by pirates with the intention to sell him for a slave:
but he waved a spear, and the oars of the sailors were turned into
vines, which climbed the masts, and spread their clusters over the
sails; and tigers, lynxes and panthers, appeared to swim round the
ship, so terrifying the crew that they leaped overboard, and were
changed into dolphins. Bacchus, in his maturity, is described as
having been the conqueror of India. He did not set out on this
expedition like other conquerors, at the head of an army. He rode in
an open chariot, which was drawn by tame lions. His attendants were
men and women in great multitudes, eminently accomplished in the arts
of rural industry. Wherever he came, he taught men the science of
husbandry, and the cultivation of the vine. Wherever he came, he was
received, not with hostility, but with festivity and welcome. On his
return however, Lycurgus, king of Thrace, and Pentheus, king of
Thebes, set themselves in opposition to the improvements which the
East had received with the most lively gratitude; and Bacchus, to
punish them, caused Lycurgus to be torn to pieces by wild horses, and
spread a delusion among the family of Pentheus, so that they mistook
him for a wild boar which had broken into their vineyards, and of
consequence fell upon him, and he expired amidst a thousand wounds.

Apollo was the author of plagues and contagious diseases; at the same
time that, when he pleased, he could restore salubrity to a climate,
and health and vigour to the sons of men. He was the father of poetry,
and possessed in an eminent degree the gift of foretelling future
events. Hecate, which was one of the names of Diana, was distinguished
as the Goddess of magic and enchantments. Venus was the Goddess of
love, the most  irresistible and omnipotent impulse of which the heart
of man is susceptible. The wand of Mercury was endowed with such
virtues, that whoever it touched, if asleep, would start up into life
and alacrity, and, if awake, would immediately fall into a profound
sleep. When it touched the dying, their souls gently parted from their
mortal frame; and, when it was applied to the dead, the dead returned
to life. Neptune had the attribute of raising and appeasing tempests:
and Vulcan, the artificer of heaven and earth, not only produced the
most exquisite specimens of skill, but also constructed furniture that
was endowed with a self-moving principle, and would present itself for
use or recede at the will of its proprietor. Pluto, in perpetrating
the rape of Proserpine, started up in his chariot through a cleft of
the earth in the vale of Enna in Sicily, and, having seized his prize,
disappeared again by the way that he came.

Ceres, the mother of Proserpine, in her search after her lost daughter,
was received with peculiar hospitality by Celeus, king of Eleusis. She
became desirous of remunerating his liberality by some special favour.
She saw his only child laid in a cradle, and labouring under a fatal
distemper. She took him under her protection. She fed him with milk
from her own breast, and at night covered him with coals of fire.
Under this treatment he not only recovered his strength, but shot up
miraculously into manhood, so that what in other men is the effect of
years, was accomplished in Triptolemus in as many hours. She gave him
for a gift the art of agriculture, so that he is said to have been the
first to teach mankind to sow and to reap corn, and to make bread of
the produce.

Prometheus, one of the race of the giants, was peculiarly distinguished
for his proficiency in the arts. Among other extraordinary productions
he formed a man of clay, of such exquisite workmanship, as to have
wanted nothing but a living soul to cause him to be acknowledged as
the paragon of the world. Minerva beheld the performance of Prometheus
with approbation, and offered him her assistance. She conducted him to
heaven, where he watched his opportunity to carry off on the tip of
his wand a portion of celestial fire from the chariot of the sun. With
this he animated his image; and the man of Prometheus moved, and
thought, and spoke, and became every thing that the fondest wishes of
his creator could ask. Jupiter ordered Vulcan to make a woman, that
should surpass this man. All the Gods gave her each one a several
gift: Venus gave her the power to charm; the Graces bestowed on her
symmetry of limb, and elegance of motion; Apollo the accomplishments
of vocal and instrumental music; Mercury the art of persuasive speech;
Juno a multitude of rich and gorgeous ornaments; and Minerva the
management of the loom and the needle. Last of all, Jupiter presented
her with a sealed box, of which the lid was no sooner unclosed, than a
multitude of calamities and evils of all imaginable sorts flew out,
only Hope remaining at the bottom.

Deucalion was the son of Prometheus and Pyrrha, his niece. They
married. In their time a flood occurred, which as they imagined
destroyed the whole human race; they were the only survivors. By the
direction of an oracle they cast stones over their shoulders; when, by
the divine interposition, the stones cast by Deucalion became men, and
those cast by Pyrrha women. Thus the earth was re-peopled.

I have put down a few of these particulars, as containing in several
instances the qualities of what is called magic, and thus furnishing
examples of some of the earliest occasions upon which supernatural
powers have been alleged to mix with human affairs.


DEMIGODS.

The early history of mortals in Greece is scarcely separated from that
of the Gods. The first adventurer that it is perhaps proper to notice,
as his exploits have I know not what of magic in them, is Perseus, the
founder of the metropolis and kingdom of Mycenae. By way of rendering
his birth illustrious, he is said to have been the son of Jupiter, by
Danae, the daughter of Acrisius, king of Argos. The king, being
forewarned by an oracle that his daughter should bear a son, by whose
hand her father should be deprived of life, thought proper to shut her
up in a tower of brass. Jupiter, having metamorphosed himself into a
shower of gold, found his way into her place of confinement, and
became the father of Perseus. On the discovery of this circumstance,
Acrisius caused both mother and child to be inclosed in a chest, and
committed to the waves. The chest however drifted upon the lands of a
person of royal descent in the island of Seriphos, who extended his
care and hospitality to both. When Perseus grew to man's estate, he
was commissioned by the king of Seriphos to bring him the head of
Medusa, one of the Gorgons. Medusa had the wonderful faculty, that
whoever met her eyes was immediately turned into stone; and the king,
who had conceived a passion for Danae, sent her son on this enterprise,
with the hope that he would never come back alive. He was however
favoured by the Gods; Mercury gave him wings to fly, Pluto an invisible
helmet, and Minerva a mirror-shield, by looking in which he could
discover how his enemy was disposed, without the danger of meeting her
eyes. Thus equipped, he accomplished his undertaking, cut off the head
of the Gorgon, and pursed it in a bag. From this exploit he proceeded
to visit Atlas, king of Mauritania, who refused him hospitality, and
in revenge Perseus turned him into stone. He next rescued Andromeda,
daughter of the king of Ethiopia, from a monster sent by Neptune to
devour her. And, lastly, returning to his mother, and finding the king
of Seriphos still incredulous and obstinate, he turned him likewise
into a stone.

The labours of Hercules, the most celebrated of the Greeks of the
heroic age, appear to have had little of magic in them, but to have
been indebted for their success to a corporal strength, superior to
that of all other mortals, united with an invincible energy of mind,
which disdained to yield to any obstacle that could be opposed to him.
His achievements are characteristic of the rude and barbarous age in
which he lived: he strangled serpents, and killed the Erymanthian
boar, the Nemaean lion, and the Hydra.


DAEDALUS.

Nearly contemporary with the labours of Hercules is the history of
Pasiphae and the Minotaur; and this brings us again within the sphere
of magic. Pasiphae was the wife of Minos, king of Crete, who conceived
an unnatural passion for a beautiful white bull, which Neptune had
presented to the king. Having found the means of gratifying her
passion, she became the mother of a monster, half-man and half-bull,
called the Minotaur. Minos was desirous of hiding this monster from
the observation of mankind, and for this purpose applied to Daedalus,
an Athenian, the most skilful artist of his time, who is said to have
invented the axe, the wedge, and the plummet, and to have found out
the use of glue. He first contrived masts and sails for ships, and
carved statues so admirably, that they not only looked as if they were
alive, but had actually the power of self-motion, and would have
escaped from the custody of their possessor, if they had not been
chained to the wall.

Daedalus contrived for Minos a labyrinth, a wonderful structure, that
covered many acres of ground. The passages in this edifice met and
crossed each other with such intricacy, that a stranger who had once
entered the building, would have been starved to death before he could
find his way out. In this labyrinth Minos shut up the Minotaur. Having
conceived a deep resentment against the people of Athens, where his
only son had been killed in a riot, he imposed upon them an annual
tribute of seven noble youths, and as many virgins to be devoured by
the Minotaur. Theseus, son of the king of Athens, put an end to this
disgrace. He was taught by Ariadne, the daughter of Minos, how to
destroy the monster, and furnished with a clue by which afterwards to
find his way out of the labyrinth.

Daedalus for some reason having incurred the displeasure of Minos, was
made a prisoner by him in his own labyrinth. But the artist being
never at an end of his inventions, contrived with feathers and wax to
make a pair of wings for himself, and escaped. Icarus, his son, who
was prisoner along with him, was provided by his father with a similar
equipment. But the son, who was inexperienced and heedless, approached
too near to the sun in his flight; and, the wax of his wings being
melted with the heat, he fell into the sea and was drowned.


THE ARGONAUTS.

Contemporary with the reign of Minos occurred the expedition of the
Argonauts. Jason, the son of the king of Iolchos in Thessaly, was at
the head of this expedition. Its object was to fetch the golden
fleece, which was hung up in a grove sacred to Mars, in the kingdom
of Colchis, at the eastern extremity of the Euxine sea. He enlisted in
this enterprise all the most gallant spirits existing in the country,
and among the rest Hercules, Theseus, Orpheus and Amphion. After having
passed through a multitude of perils, one of which was occasioned by
the Cyanean rocks at the entrance of the Euxine, that had the quality
of closing upon every vessel which attempted to make its way between
them and crushing it to pieces, a danger that could only be avoided by
sending a dove before as their harbinger, they at length arrived.


MEDEA.

The golden fleece was defended by bulls, whose hoofs were brass, and
whose breath was fire, and by a never-sleeping dragon that planted
itself at the foot of the tree upon which the fleece was suspended.
Jason was prepared for his undertaking by Medea, the daughter of the
king of the country, herself an accomplished magician, and furnished
with philtres, drugs and enchantments. Thus equipped, he tamed the
bulls, put a yoke on their necks, and caused them to plough two acres
of the stiffest land. He killed the dragon, and, to complete the
adventure, drew the monster's teeth, sowed them in the ground, and saw
an army of soldiers spring from the seed. The army hastened forward to
attack him; but he threw a large stone into the midst of their ranks,
when they immediately turned from him, and, falling on each other,
were all killed with their mutual weapons.

The adventure being accomplished, Medea set out with Jason on his
return to Thessaly. On their arrival, they found Aeson, the father of
Jason, and Pelias, his uncle, who had usurped the throne, both old and
decrepid. Jason applied to Medea, and asked her whether among her
charms she had none to make an old man young again. She replied she
had: she drew the impoverished and watery blood from the body of Aeson;
she infused the juice of certain potent herbs into his veins; and he
rose from the operation as fresh and vigorous a man as his son.

The daughters of Pelias professed a perfect willingness to abdicate
the throne of Iolchos; but, before they retired, they requested Medea
to do the same kindness for their father which she had already done
for Aeson. She said she would. She told them the method was to cut the
old man in pieces, and boil him in a kettle with an infusion of
certain herbs, and he would come out as smooth and active as a child.

The daughters of Pelias a little scrupled the operation. Medea, seeing
this, begged they would not think she was deceiving them. If however
they doubted, she desired they would bring her the oldest ram from
their flocks, and they should see the experiment. Medea cut up the
ram, cast in certain herbs, and the old bell-wether came out as
beautiful and innocent a he-lamb as was ever beheld. The daughters of
Pelias were satisfied. They divided their father in pieces; but he was
never restored either to health or life.

From Iolchos, upon some insurrection of the people, Medea and Jason
fled to Corinth. Here they lived ten years in much harmony. At the end
of that time Jason grew tired of his wife, and fell in love with
Glauce, daughter of the king of Corinth. Medea was greatly exasperated
with his infidelity, and, among other enormities, slew with her own
hand the two children she had borne him before his face, Jason
hastened to punish her barbarity; but Medea mounted a chariot drawn by
fiery dragons, fled through the air to Athens, and escaped.

At Athens she married Aegeus, king of that city. Aegeus by a former wife
had a son, named Theseus, who for some reason had been brought up
obscure, unknown and in exile. At a suitable time he returned home to
his father with the intention to avow his parentage. But Medea was
beforehand with him. She put a poisoned goblet into the hands of Aegeus
at an entertainment he gave to Theseus, with the intent that he should
deliver it to his son. At the critical moment Aegeus cast his eyes on
the sword of Theseus, which he recognised as that which he had
delivered with his son, when a child, and had directed that it should
be brought by him, when a man, as a token of the mystery of his birth.
The goblet was cast away; the father and son rushed into each other's
arms; and Medea fled from Athens in her chariot drawn by dragons
through the air, as she had years before fled from Corinth.


CIRCE.

Circe was the sister of Aeetes and Pasiphae, and was, like Medea, her
niece, skilful in sorcery. She had besides the gift of immortality.
She was exquisitely beautiful; but she employed the charms of her
person, and the seducing grace of her manners to a bad purpose. She
presented to every stranger who landed in her territory an enchanted
cup, of which she intreated him to drink. He no sooner tasted it, than
he was turned into a hog, and was driven by the magician to her sty.
The unfortunate stranger retained under this loathsome appearance the
consciousness of what he had been, and mourned for ever the criminal
compliance by which  he was brought to so melancholy a pass.


ORPHEUS.

Cicero [22] quotes Aristotle as affirming that there was no such man
as Orpheus. But Aristotle is at least single in that opinion. And
there are too many circumstances known respecting Orpheus, and which
have obtained the consenting voice of all antiquity, to allow us to
call in question his existence. He was a native of Thrace, and from
that country migrated into Greece. He travelled into Egypt for the
purpose of collecting there the information necessary to the
accomplishment of his ends. He died a violent death; and, as is almost
universally affirmed, fell a sacrifice to the resentment and fury of
the women of his native soil. [23]

Orpheus was doubtless a poet; though it is not probable that any of
his genuine productions have been handed down to us. He was, as all
the poets of so remote a period were, extremely accomplished in all
the arts of vocal and instrumental music. He civilised the rude
inhabitants of Greece, and subjected them to order and law. He formed
them into communities. He is said by Aristophanes [24] and Horace [25]
to have reclaimed the savage man, from slaughter, and an indulgence in
food that was loathsome and foul. And this has with sufficient
probability been interpreted to mean, that he found the race of men
among whom he lived cannibals, and that, to cure them the more
completely of this horrible practice, he taught them to be contented
to subsist upon the fruits of the earth. [26] Music and poetry are
understood to have been made specially instrumental by him to the
effecting this purpose. He is said to have made the hungry lion and
the famished tiger obedient to his bidding, and to put off their wild
and furious natures.

This is interpreted by Horace [27] and other recent expositors to mean
no more than that he reduced the race of savages as he found them, to
order and civilisation. But it was at first perhaps understood more
literally. We shall not do justice to the traditions of these remote
times, if we do not in imagination transport ourselves among them, and
teach ourselves to feel their feelings, and conceive their conceptions.
Orpheus lived in a time when all was enchantment and prodigy. Gifted
and extraordinary persons in those ages believed that they were endowed
with marvellous prerogatives, and acted upon that belief. We may
occasionally observe, even in these days of the dull and the literal,
how great is the ascendancy of the man over the beast, when he feels a
full and entire confidence in that ascendancy. The eye and the gesture
of man cannot fail to produce effects, incredible till they are seen.
Magic was the order of the day; and the enthusiasm of its heroes was
raised to the highest pitch, and attended with no secret misgivings.
We are also to consider that, in all operations of a magical nature,
there is a wonderful mixture of frankness and _bonhommie_ with a
strong vein of cunning and craft. Man in every age is full of
incongruous and incompatible principles; and, when we shall cease to
be inconsistent, we shall cease to be men.

It is difficult fully to explain what is meant by the story of Orpheus
and Eurydice; but in its circumstances it bears a striking resemblance
to what has been a thousand times recorded respecting the calling up
of the ghosts of the dead by means of sorcery. The disconsolate
husband has in the first place recourse to the resistless aid of
music. [28] After many preparatives he appears to have effected his
purpose, and prevailed upon the powers of darkness to allow him the
presence of his beloved. She appears in the sequel however to have
been a thin and a fleeting shadow. He is forbidden to cast his eyes on
her; and, if he had obeyed this injunction, it is uncertain how the
experiment would have ended. He proceeds however, as he is commanded,
towards the light of day. He is led to believe that his consort is
following his steps. He is beset with a multitude of unearthly
phenomena. He advances for some time with confidence. At length he is
assailed with doubts. He has recourse to the auricular sense, to know
if she is following him. He can hear nothing. Finally he can endure
this uncertainty no longer; and, in defiance of the prohibition he has
received, cannot refrain from turning his head to ascertain whether he
is baffled, and has spent all his labour in vain. He sees her; but no
sooner he sees her, than she becomes evanescent and impalpable;
farther and farther she retreats before him; she utters a shrill cry,
and endeavours to articulate; but she grows more and more
imperceptible; and in the conclusion he is left with the scene around
him in all respects the same as it had been before his incantations.
The result of the whole that is known of Orpheus, is, that he was an
eminently great and virtuous man, but was the victim of singular
calamity.

We have not yet done with the history of Orpheus. As has been said, he
fell a sacrifice to the resentment and fury of the women of his native
soil. They are affirmed to have torn him limb from limb. His head,
divided from his body, floated down the waters of the Hebrus, and
miraculously, as it passed along to the sea, it was still heard to
exclaim in mournful accents, Eurydice, Eurydice! [29] At length it was
carried ashore on the island of Lesbos. [30] Here, by some
extraordinary concurrence of circumstances, it found a resting-place
in a fissure of a rock over-arched by a cave, and, thus domiciliated,
is said to have retained the power of speech, and to have uttered
oracles. Not only the people of Lesbos resorted to it for guidance in
difficult questions, but also the Asiatic Greeks from Ionia and Aetolia;
and its fame and character for predicting future events even extended
to Babylon. [31]


AMPHION.

The story of Amphion is more perplexing than that of the living
Orpheus. Both of them turn in a great degree upon the miraculous
effects of music. Amphion was of the royal family of Thebes, and
ultimately became ruler of the territory. He is said, by the potency
of his lyre, or his skill in the magic art, to have caused the stones
to follow him, to arrange themselves in the way he proposed, and
without the intervention of a human hand to have raised a wall about
his metropolis. [32] It is certainly less difficult to conceive the
savage man to be rendered placable, and to conform to the dictates of
civilisation, or even wild beasts to be made tame, than to imagine
stones to obey the voice and the will of a human being. The example
however is not singular; and hereafter we shall find related that
Merlin, the British enchanter, by the power of magic caused the rocks
of Stonehenge, though of such vast dimensions, to be carried through
the air from Ireland to the place where we at present find them.--Homer
mentions that Amphion, and his brother Zethus built the walls of
Thebes, but does not describe it as having been done by miracle. [33]


TIRESIAS.

Tiresias was one of the most celebrated soothsayers of the early ages
of Greece. He lived in the times of Oedipus, and the war of the seven
chiefs against Thebes. He was afflicted by the Gods with blindness, in
consequence of some displeasure they conceived against him; but in
compensation they endowed him beyond all other mortals with the gift
of prophecy. He is said to have understood the language of birds. He
possessed the art of divining future events from the various
indications that manifest themselves in fire, in smoke, and in other
ways, [34] but to have set the highest value upon the communications
of the dead, whom by spells and incantations he constrained to appear
and answer his enquiries; [35] and he is represented as pouring out
tremendous menaces against them, when they shewed themselves tardy to
attend upon his commands. [36]


ABARIS.

Abaris, the Scythian, known to us for his visit to Greece, was by all
accounts a great magician. Herodotus says [37] that he is reported to
have travelled over the world with an arrow, eating nothing during his
journey. Other authors relate that this arrow was given to him by
Apollo, and that he rode upon it through the air, over lands, and
seas, and all inaccessible places. [38] The time in which he flourished
is very uncertain, some having represented him as having constructed
the Palladium, which, as long as it was preserved, kept Troy from
being taken by an enemy, [39] and others affirming that he was
familiar with Pythagoras, who lived six hundred years later, and that
he was admitted into his special confidence. [40] He is said to have
possessed the faculty of foretelling earthquakes, allaying storms, and
driving away pestilence; he gave out predictions wherever he went; and
is described as an enchanter, professing to cure diseases by virtue of
certain words which he pronounced over those who were afflicted with
them. [41]


PYTHAGORAS.

The name of Pythagoras is one of the most memorable in the records of
the human species; and his character is well worthy of the minutest
investigation. By this name we are brought at once within the limits
of history properly so called. He lived in the time of Cyrus and
Darius Hystaspes, of Croesus, of Pisistratus, of Polycrates, tyrant of
Samos, and Amasis, king of Egypt. Many hypotheses have been laid down
respecting the precise period of his birth and death; but, as it is
not to our purpose to enter into any lengthened discussions of that
sort, we will adopt at once the statement that appears to be the most
probable, which is that of Lloyd, [42] who fixes his birth about the
year before Christ 586, and his death about the year 506.

Pythagoras was a man of the most various accomplishments, and appears
to have penetrated in different directions into the depths of human
knowledge. He sought wisdom in its retreats of fairest promise, in
Egypt and other distant countries. [43] In this investigation he
employed the earlier period of his life, probably till he was forty,
and devoted the remainder to such modes of proceeding, as appeared to
him the most likely to secure the advantage of what he had acquired to
a late posterity. [44]

He founded a school, and delivered his acquisitions by oral
communication to a numerous body of followers. He divided his pupils
into two classes, the one neophytes, to whom was explained only the
most obvious and general truths, the other who were admitted into the
entire confidence of the master. These last he caused to throw their
property into a common stock, and to live together in the same place
of resort. [45] He appears to have spent the latter half of his life
in that part of Italy, called Magna Graecia, so denominated in some
degree from the numerous colonies of Grecians by whom it was planted,
and partly perhaps from the memory of the illustrious things which
Pythagoras achieved there. [46] He is said to have spread the seeds of
political liberty in Crotona, Sybaris, Metapontum, and Rhegium, and
from thence in Sicily to Tauromenium, Catana, Agrigentum and Himera.
[47] Charondas and Zaleucus, themselves famous legislators, derived
the rudiments of their political wisdom from the instructions of
Pythagoras. [48]

But this marvellous man in some way, whether from the knowlege he
received, or from his own proper discoveries, has secured to his
species benefits of a more permanent nature, and which shall outlive
the revolutions of ages, and the instability of political institutions.
He was a profound geometrician. The two theorems, that the internal
angles of every right-line triangle are equal to two right angles, [49]
and that the square of the hypothenuse of every right angled triangle
is equal to the sum of the squares of the other two sides, [50] are
ascribed to him. In memory of the latter of these discoveries he is
said to have offered a public sacrifice to the Gods; and the theorem
is still known by the name of the Pythagorean theorem. He ascertained
from the length of the Olympic course, which was understood to have
measured six hundred of Hercules's feet, the precise stature of that
hero. [51] Lastly, Pythagoras is the first person, who is known to
have taught the spherical figure of the earth, and that we have
antipodes; [52] and he propagated the doctrine that the earth is a
planet, and that the sun is the centre round which the earth and the
other planets move, now known by the name of the Copernican
system. [53]

To inculcate a pure and a simple mode of subsistence was also an
express object of pursuit to Pythagoras. He taught a total abstinence
from every thing having had the property of animal life. It has been
affirmed, as we have seen, [54] that Orpheus before him taught the
same thing. But the claim of Orpheus to this distinction is ambiguous;
while the theories and dogmas of the Samian sage, as he has frequently
been styled, were more methodically digested, and produced more
lasting and unequivocal effects. He taught temperance in all its
branches, and a resolute subjection of the appetites of the body to
contemplation and the exercises of the mind; and, by the unremitted
discipline and authority he exerted over his followers, he caused his
lessons to be constantly observed. There was therefore an edifying and
an exemplary simplicity that prevailed as far as the influence of
Pythagoras extended, that won golden opinions to his adherents at all
times that they appeared, and in all places. [55]

One revolution that Pythagoras worked, was that, whereas, immediately
before, those who were most conspicuous among the Greeks as instructors
of mankind in understanding and virtue, styled themselves sophists,
professors of wisdom, this illustrious man desired to be known only by
the appellation of a philosopher, a lover of wisdom. [56] The sophists
had previously brought their denomination into discredit and reproach,
by the arrogance of their pretensions, and the imperious way in which
they attempted to lay down the law to the world.

The modesty of this appellation however did not altogether suit with
the deep designs of Pythagoras, the ascendancy he resolved to acquire,
and the oracular subjection in which he deemed it necessary to hold
those who placed themselves under his instruction. This wonderful man
set out with making himself a model of the passive and unscrupulous
docility which he afterwards required from others. He did not begin to
teach till he was forty years of age, and from eighteen to that period
he studied in foreign countries, with the resolution to submit to all
his teachers enjoined, and to make himself master of their least
communicated and most secret wisdom. In Egypt in particular, we are
told that, though he brought a letter of recommendation from
Polycrates, his native sovereign, to Amasis, king of that country, who
fully concurred with the views of the writer, the priests, jealous of
admitting a foreigner into their secrets, baffled him as long as they
could, referring him from one college to another, and prescribing to
him the most rigorous preparatives, not excluding the rite of
circumcision. [57] But Pythagoras endured and underwent every thing,
till at length their unwillingness was conquered, and his perseverance
received its suitable reward.

When in the end Pythagoras thought himself fully qualified for the
task he had all along had in view, he was no less strict in prescribing
ample preliminaries to his own scholars. At the time that a pupil was
proposed to him, the master, we are told, examined him with multiplied
questions as to his principles, his habits and intentions, observed
minutely his voice and manner of speaking, his walk and his gestures,
the lines of his countenance, and the expression and management of his
eye, and, when he was satisfied with these, then and not till then
admitted him as a probationer. [58] It is to be supposed that all this
must have been personal. As soon however as this was over, the master
was withdrawn from the sight of the pupil; and a noviciate of three
and five, in all eight years, [59] was prescribed to the scholar,
during which time he was only to hear his instructor from behind a
curtain, and the strictest silence was enjoined him through the whole
period. As the instructions Pythagoras received in Egypt and the East
admitted of no dispute, so in his turn he required an unreserved
submission from those who heard him: autos iphae "the master has said
it," was deemed a sufficient solution to all doubt and uncertainty. [60]

To give the greater authority and effect to his communications
Pythagoras hid himself during the day at least from the great body of
his pupils, and was only seen by them at night. Indeed there is no
reason to suppose that any one was admitted into his entire
familiarity. When he came forth, he appeared in a long garment of the
purest white, with a flowing beard, and a garland upon his head. He is
said to have been of the finest symmetrical form, with a majestic
carriage, and a grave and awful countenance. [61] He suffered his
followers to believe that he was one of the Gods, the Hyperborean
Apollo, [62] and is said to have told Abaris that he assumed the human
form, that he might the better invite men to an easiness of approach
and to confidence in him. [63] What however seems to be agreed in by
all his biographers, is that he professed to have already in different
ages appeared in the likeness of man: first as Aethalides, the son of
Mercury; and, when his father expressed himself ready to invest him
with any gift short of immortality, he prayed that, as the human soul
is destined successively to dwell in various forms, he might have the
privilege in each to remember his former state of being, which was
granted him. From, Aethalides he became Euphorbus, who slew Patroclus
at the siege of Troy. He then appeared as Hermotimus, then Pyrrhus, a
fisherman of Delos, and finally Pythagoras. He said that a period of
time was interposed between each transmigration, during which he
visited the seat of departed souls; and he professed to relate a part
of the wonders he had seen. [64] He is said to have eaten sparingly
and in secret, and in all respects to have given himself out for a
being not subject to the ordinary laws of nature. [65]

Pythagoras therefore pretended to miraculous endowments. Happening to
be on the sea-shore when certain fishermen drew to land an enormous
multitude of fishes, he desired them to allow him to dispose of the
capture, which they consented to, provided he would name the precise
number they had caught. He did so, and required that they should throw
their prize into the sea again, at the same time paying them the value
of the fish. [66] He tamed a Daunian bear by whispering in his ear,
and prevailed on him henceforth to refrain from the flesh of animals,
and to feed on vegetables. By the same means he induced an ox not to
eat beans, which was a diet specially prohibited by Pythagoras; and he
called down an eagle from his flight, causing him to sit on his hand,
and submit to be stroked down by the philosopher. [67] In Greece, when
he passed the river Nessus in Macedon, the stream was heard to salute
him with the words "Hail, Pythagoras!" [68] When Abaris addressed him
as one of the heavenly host, he took the stranger aside, and convinced
him that he was under no mistake, by exhibiting to him his thigh of
gold: or, according to another account, he used the same sort of
evidence at a certain time, to satisfy his pupils of his celestial
descent. [69] He is said to have been seen on the same day at
Metapontum in Italy, and at Taurominium in Sicily, though these places
are divided by the sea, so that it was conceived that it would cost
several days to pass from one to the other. [70] In one instance he
absented himself from his associates in Italy for a whole year; and
when he appeared again, related that he had passed that time in the
infernal regions, describing likewise the marvellous things he had
seen. [71] Diogenes Laertius, speaking of this circumstance affirms
however that he remained during this period in a cave, where his
mother conveyed to him intelligence and necessaries, and that, when
he came once more into light and air, he appeared so emaciated and
colourless, that he might well be believed to have come out of Hades.

The close of the life of Pythagoras was, according to every statement,
in the midst of misfortune and violence. Some particulars are related
by Iamblichus, [72] which, though he is not an authority beyond all
exception, are so characteristic as seem to entitle them to the being
transcribed. This author is more circumstantial than any other in
stating the elaborate steps by which the pupils of Pythagoras came to
be finally admitted into the full confidence of the master. He says,
that they passed three years in the first place in a state of
probation, carefully watched by their seniors, and exposed to their
occasional taunts and ironies, by way of experiment to ascertain
whether they were of a temper sufficiently philosophical and firm. At
the expiration of that period they were admitted to a noviciate, in
which they were bound to uninterrupted silence, and heard the lectures
of the master, while he was himself concealed from their view by a
curtain. They were then received to initiation, and required to
deliver over their property to the common stock. They were admitted to
intercourse with the master. They were invited to a participation of
the most obscure theories, and the abstrusest problems. If however in
this stage of their progress they were discovered to be too weak of
intellectual penetration, or any other fundamental objection were
established against them, they were expelled the community; the double
of the property they had contributed to the common stock was paid down
to them; a head-stone and a monument inscribed with their names were
set up in the place of meeting of the community; they were considered
as dead; and, if afterwards they met by chance any of those who were
of the privileged few, they were treated by them as entirely strangers.

Cylon, the richest man, or, as he is in one place styled, the prince,
of Crotona, had manifested the greatest partiality to Pythagoras. He
was at the same time a man of rude, impatient and boisterous character.
He, together with Perialus of Thurium, submitted to all the severities
of the Pythagorean school. They passed the three years of probation,
and the five years of silence. They were received into the familiarity
of the master. They were then initiated, and delivered all their
wealth into the common stock. They were however ultimately pronounced
deficient in intellectual power, or for some other reason were not
judged worthy to continue among the confidential pupils of Pythagoras.
They were expelled. The double of the property they had contributed
was paid back to them. A monument was set up in memory of what they
had been; and they were pronounced dead to the school.

It will easily be conceived in what temper Cylon sustained this
degradation. Of Perialus we hear nothing further. But Cylon, from
feelings of the deepest reverence and awe for Pythagoras, which he had
cherished for years, was filled even to bursting with inextinguishable
hatred and revenge. The unparalleled merits, the venerable age of the
master whom he had so long followed, had no power to control his
violence. His paramount influence in the city insured him the command
of a great body of followers. He excited them to a frame of turbulence
and riot. He represented to them how intolerable was the despotism of
this pretended philosopher. They surrounded the school in which the
pupils were accustomed to assemble, and set it on fire. Forty persons
perished in the flames. [73] According to some accounts Pythagoras was
absent at the time. According to others he and two of his pupils
escaped. He retired from Crotona to Metapontum. But the hostility
which had broken out in the former city, followed him there. He took
refuge in the Temple of the Muses. But he was held so closely besieged
that no provisions could be conveyed to him; and he finally perished
with hunger, after, according to Laertius, forty days' abstinence. [74]

It is difficult to imagine any thing more instructive, and more
pregnant with matter for salutary reflection, than the contrast
presented to us by the character and system of action of Pythagoras
on the one hand, and those of the great enquirers of the last two
centuries, for example, Bacon, Newton and Locke, on the other.
Pythagoras probably does not yield to any one of these in the
evidences of true intellectual greatness. In his school, in the
followers he trained resembling himself, and in the salutary effects
he produced on the institutions of the various republics of Magna
Graecia and Sicily, he must be allowed greatly to have excelled them.
His discoveries of various propositions in geometry, of the earth as
a planet, and of the solar system as now universally recognised,
clearly stamp him a genius of the highest order.

Yet this man, thus enlightened and philanthropical, established his
system of proceeding upon narrow and exclusive principles, and
conducted it by methods of artifice, quackery and delusion. One of his
leading maxims was, that the great and fundamental truths to the
establishment of which he devoted himself, were studiously to be
concealed from the vulgar, and only to be imparted to a select few,
and after years of the severest noviciate and trial. He learned his
earliest lessons of wisdom in Egypt after this method, and he
conformed through life to the example which had thus been delivered to
him. The severe examination that he made of the candidates previously
to their being admitted into his school, and the years of silence that
were then prescribed to them, testify this. He instructed them by
symbols, obscure and enigmatical propositions, which they were first
to exercise their ingenuity to expound. The authority and dogmatical
assertions of the master were to remain unquestioned; and the pupils
were to fashion themselves to obsequious and implicit submission, and
were the furthest in the world from being encouraged to the independent
exercise of their own understandings. There was nothing that Pythagoras
was more fixed to discountenance, than the communication of the truths
upon which he placed the highest value, to the uninitiated. It is not
probable therefore that he wrote any thing: all was communicated
orally, by such gradations, and with such discretion, as he might
think fit to adopt and to exercise.

Delusion and falsehood were main features of his instruction. With
what respect therefore can we consider, and what manliness worthy of
his high character and endowments can we impute to, his discourses
delivered from behind a curtain, his hiding himself during the day,
and only appearing by night in a garb assumed for the purpose of
exciting awe and veneration? What shall we say to the story of his
various transmigrations? At first sight it appears in the light of the
most audacious and unblushing imposition. And, if we were to yield so
far as to admit that by a high-wrought enthusiasm, by a long train of
maceration and visionary reveries, he succeeded in imposing on himself,
this, though in a different way, would scarcely less detract from the
high stage of eminence upon which the nobler parts of his character
would induce us to place him.

Such were some of the main causes that have made his efforts
perishable, and the lustre which should have attended his genius in a
great degree transitory and fugitive. He was probably much under the
influence of a contemptible jealousy, and must be considered as
desirous that none of his contemporaries or followers should eclipse
their master. All was oracular and dogmatic in the school of
Pythagoras. He prized and justly prized the greatness of his
attainments and discoveries, and had no conception that any thing
could go beyond them. He did not encourage, nay, he resolutely opposed,
all true independence of mind, and that undaunted spirit of enterprise
which is the atmosphere in which the sublimest thoughts are most
naturally generated. He therefore did not throw open the gates of
science and wisdom, and invite every comer; but on the contrary
narrowed the entrance, and carefully reduced the number of aspirants.
He thought not of the most likely methods to give strength and
permanence and an extensive sphere to the progress of the human mind.
For these reasons he wrote nothing; but consigned all to the frail and
uncertain custody of tradition. And distant posterity has amply
avenged itself upon the narrowness of his policy; and the name of
Pythagoras, which would otherwise have been ranked with the first
luminaries of mankind, and consigned to everlasting gratitude, has in
consequence of a few radical and fatal mistakes, been often loaded
with obloquy, and the hero who bore it been indiscriminately classed
among the votaries of imposture and artifice.


EPIMENIDES.

Epimenides has been mentioned among the disciples of Pythagoras; but
he probably lived at an earlier period. He was a native of Crete. The
first extraordinary circumstance that is recorded of him is, that,
being very young, he was sent by his father in search of a stray
sheep, when, being overcome by the heat of the weather, he retired
into a cave, and slept fifty-seven years. Supposing that he had slept
only a few hours, he repaired first to his father's country-house,
which he found in possession of a new tenant, and then to the city,
where he encountered his younger brother, now grown an old man, who
with difficulty was brought to acknowledge him. [75] It was probably
this circumstance that originally brought Epimenides into repute as a
prophet, and a favourite of the Gods.

Epimenides appears to have been one of those persons, who make it
their whole study to delude their fellow-men, and to obtain for
themselves the reputation of possessing supernatural gifts. Such
persons, almost universally, and particularly in ages of ignorance and
wonder, become themselves the dupes of their own pretensions. He gave
out that he was secretly subsisted by food brought to him by the
nymphs; and he is said to have taken nourishment in so small
quantities, as to be exempted from the ordinary necessities of nature.
[76] He boasted that he could send his soul out of his body, and recal
it, when he pleased; and alternately appeared an inanimate corpse, and
then again his life would return to him, and he appear capable of
every human function as before. [77] He is said to have practised the
ceremony of exorcising houses and fields, and thus rendering them
fruitful and blessed. [78] He frequently uttered prophecies of events
with such forms of ceremony and such sagacious judgment, that they
seemed to come to pass as he predicted.

One of the most memorable acts of his life happened in this manner.
Cylon, the head of one of the principal families in Athens, set on
foot a rebellion against the government, and surprised the citadel.
His power however was of short duration. Siege was laid to the place,
and Cylon found his safety in flight. His partisans forsook their
arms, and took refuge at the altars. Seduced from this security by
fallacious promises, they were brought to judgment and all of them put
to death. The Gods were said to be offended with this violation of the
sanctions of religion, and sent a plague upon the city. All things
were in confusion, and sadness possessed the whole community.
Prodigies were perpetually seen; the spectres of the dead walked the
streets; and terror universally prevailed. The sacrifices offered to
the gods exhibited the most unfavourable symptoms. [79] In this
emergency the Athenian senate resolved to send for Epimenides to come
to their relief. His reputation was great. He was held for a holy and
devout man, and wise in celestial things by inspiration from above. A
vessel was fitted out under the command of one of the first citizens
of the state to fetch Epimenides from Crete. He performed various
rites and purifications. He took a certain number of sheep, black and
white, and led them to the Areopagus, where he caused them to be let
loose to go wherever they would. He directed certain persons to follow
them, and mark the place where they lay down. He enquired to what
particular deity the spot was consecrated, and sacrificed the sheep to
that deity; and in the result of these ceremonies the plague was
stayed. According to others he put an end to the plague by the
sacrifice of two human victims. The Athenian senate, full of gratitude
to their benefactor, tendered him the gift of a talent. But Epimenides
refused all compensation, and only required, as an acknowledgment of
what he had done, that there should be perpetual peace between the
Athenians and the people of Gnossus, his native city. [80] He is said
to have died shortly after his return to his country, being of the age
of one hundred and fifty-seven years. [81]


EMPEDOCLES.

Empedocles has also been mentioned as a disciple of Pythagoras. But he
probably lived too late for that to have been the case. His principles
were in a great degree similar to those of that illustrious personage;
and he might have studied under one of the immediate successors of
Pythagoras. He was a citizen of Agrigentum in Sicily; and, having
inherited considerable wealth, exercised great authority in his native
place. [82] He was a distinguished orator and poet. He was greatly
conversant in the study of nature, and was eminent for his skill in
medicine. [83] In addition to these accomplishments, he appears to
have been a devoted adherent to the principles of liberty. He effected
the dissolution of the ruling council of Agrigentum, and substituted
in their room a triennial magistracy, by means of which the public
authority became not solely in the hands of the rich as before, but
was shared by them with expert and intelligent men of an inferior
class. [84] He opposed all arbitrary exercises of rule. He gave
dowries from his own stores to many young maidens of impoverished
families, and settled them in eligible marriages. [85] He performed
many cures upon his fellow-citizens; and is especially celebrated for
having restored a woman to life, who had been apparently dead,
according to one account for seven days, but according to others for
thirty. [86]

But the most memorable things known of Empedocles, are contained in
the fragments of his verses that have been preserved to us. In one of
them he says of himself, "I well remember the time before I was
Empedocles, that I once was a boy, then a girl, a plant, a glittering
fish, a bird that cut the air." [87] Addressing those who resorted to
him for improvement and wisdom, he says, "By my instructions you shall
learn medicines that are powerful to cure disease, and re-animate old
age; you shall be able to calm the savage winds which lay waste the
labours of the husbandman, and, when you will, shall send forth the
tempest again; you shall cause the skies to be fair and serene, or
once more shall draw down refreshing showers, re-animating the fruits
of the earth; nay, you shall recal the strength of the dead man, when
he has already become the victim of Pluto." [88] Further, speaking of
himself, Empedocles exclaims: "Friends, who inhabit the great city
laved by the yellow Acragas, all hail! I mix with you a God, no longer
a mortal, and am every where honoured by you, as is just; crowned with
fillets, and fragrant garlands, adorned with which when I visit
populous cities, I am revered by both men and women, who follow me by
ten thousands, enquiring the road to boundless wealth, seeking the
gift of prophecy, and who would learn the marvellous skill to cure all
kinds of diseases." [89]

The best known account of the death of Empedocles may reasonably be
considered as fabulous. From what has been said it sufficiently
appears, that he was a man of extraordinary intellectual endowments,
and the most philanthropical dispositions; at the same time that he
was immoderately vain, aspiring by every means in his power to acquire
to himself a deathless remembrance. Working on these hints, a story
has been invented that he aspired to a miraculous way of disappearing
from among men; and for this purpose repaired, when alone, to the top
of Mount Aetna, then in a state of eruption, and threw himself down the
burning crater: but it is added, that in the result of this perverse
ambition he was baffled, the volcano having thrown up one of his
brazen sandals, by means of which the mode of his death became known.
[90]


ARISTEAS.

Herodotus tells a marvellous story of one Aristeas, a poet of
Proconnesus, an island of the Propontis. This man, coming by chance
into a fuller's workshop in his native place, suddenly fell down dead.
As the man was of considerable rank, the fuller immediately, quitting
and locking up his shop, proceeded to inform his family of what had
happened. The relations went accordingly, having procured what was
requisite to give the deceased the rites of sepulture, to the shop;
but, when it was opened, they could discover no vestige of Aristeas,
either dead or alive. A traveller however from the neighbouring town
of Cyzicus on the continent, protested that he had just left that
place, and, as he set foot in the wherry which had brought him over,
had met Aristeas, and held a particular conversation with him. Seven
years after, Aristeas reappeared at Proconnesus, resided there a
considerable time, and during this abode wrote his poem of the wars of
the one-eyed Arimaspians and the Gryphons. He then again disappeared
in an unaccountable manner. But, what is more than all extraordinary,
three hundred and forty years after this disappearance, he shewed
himself again at Metapontum, in Magna Graecia, and commanded the
citizens to erect a statue in his honour near the temple of Apollo in
the forum; which being done, he raised himself in the air; and flew
away in the form of a crow. [91]


HERMOTIMUS.

Hermotimus, or, as Plutarch names him, Hermodorus of Clazomene, is
said to have possessed, like Epimenides, the marvellous power of
quitting his body, and returning to it again, as often, and for as
long a time as he pleased. In these absences his unembodied spirit
would visit what places he thought proper, observe every thing that
was going on, and, when he returned to his fleshy tabernacle, make a
minute relation of what he had seen. Hermotimus had enemies, who, one
time when his body had lain unanimated unusually long, beguiled his
wife, made her believe that he was certainly dead, and that it was
disrespectful and indecent to keep him so long in that state. The
woman therefore placed her husband on the funeral pyre, and consumed
him to ashes; so that, continues the philosopher, when the soul of
Hermotimus came back again, it no longer found its customary
receptacle to retire into. [92] Certainly this kind of treatment
appeared to furnish an infallible criterion, whether the seeming
absences of the soul of this miraculous man were pretended or real.


THE MOTHER OF DEMARATUS, KING OF SPARTA.

Herodotus [93] tells a story of the mother of Demaratus, king of
Sparta, which bears a striking resemblance to the fairy tales of
modern times. This lady, afterward queen of Sparta, was sprung from
opulent parents, but, when she was born, was so extravagantly ugly,
that her parents hid her from all human observation. According to the
mode of the times however, they sent the babe daily in its nurse's
arms to the shrine of Helen, now metamorphosed into a Goddess, to pray
that the child might be delivered from its present preternatural
deformity. On these occasions the child was shrouded in many coverings,
that it might escape being seen. One day as the nurse came out of the
temple, a strange woman met her, and asked her what she carried so
carefully concealed. The nurse said it was a female child, but of
opulent parents, and she was strictly enjoined that it should be seen
by no one. The stranger was importunate, and by dint of perseverance
overcame the nurse's reluctance. The woman took the babe in her arms,
stroked down its hair, kissed it, and then returning it to the nurse,
said that it should grow up the most perfect beauty in Sparta. So
accordingly it proved: and the king of the country, having seen her,
became so enamoured of her, that, though he already had a wife, and
she a husband, he overcame all obstacles, and made her his queen.


ORACLES.

One of the most extraordinary things to be met with in the history of
ancient times is the oracles. They maintained their reputation for
many successive centuries. The most famous perhaps were that of Delphi
in Greece, and that of Jupiter Ammon in the deserts of Lybia. But they
were scattered through many cities, many plains, and many islands.
They were consulted by the foolish and the wise; and scarcely anything
considerable was undertaken, especially about the time of the Persian
invasion into Greece, without the parties having first had recourse to
these; and they in most cases modified the conduct of princes and
armies accordingly. To render the delusion more successful, every kind
of artifice was put in practice. The oracle could only be consulted on
fixed days; and the persons who resorted to it, prefaced their
application with costly offerings to the presiding God. Their
questions passed through the hands of certain priests, residing in
and about the temple. These priests received the embassy with all due
solemnity, and retired. A priestess, or Pythia, who was seldom or
never seen by any of the profane vulgar, was the immediate vehicle of
communication with the God. She was cut off from all intercourse with
the world, and was carefully trained by the attendant priests.
Spending almost the whole of her time in solitude, and taught to
consider her office as ineffably sacred, she saw visions, and was for
the most part in a state of great excitement. The Pythia, at least of
the Delphian God, was led on with much ceremony to the performance of
her office, and placed upon the sacred tripod. The tripod, we are
told, stood over a chasm in the rock, from which issued fumes of an
inebriating quality. The Pythia became gradually penetrated through
every limb with these fumes, till her bosom swelled, her features
enlarged, her mouth foamed, her voice seemed supernatural, and she
uttered words that could sometimes scarcely be called articulate.
She could with difficulty contain herself, and seemed to be possessed,
and wholly overpowered, with the God. After a prelude of many
unintelligible sounds, uttered with fervour and a sort of frenzy, she
became by degrees more distinct. She uttered incoherent sentences,
with breaks and pauses, that were filled up with preternatural efforts
and distorted gestures; while the priests stood by, carefully recording
her words, and then reducing them into a sort of obscure signification.
They finally digested them for the most part into a species of
hexameter verse. We may suppose the supplicants during this ceremony
placed at a proper distance, so as to observe these things imperfectly,
while the less they understood, they were ordinarily the more impressed
with religious awe, and prepared implicitly to receive what was
communicated to them. Sometimes the priestess found herself in a frame,
not entirely equal to her function, and refused for the present to
proceed with the ceremony.

The priests of the oracle doubtless conducted them in a certain degree
like the gipsies and fortune-tellers of modern times, cunningly
procuring to themselves intelligence in whatever way they could, and
ingeniously worming out the secrets of their suitors, at the same time
contriving that their drift should least of all be suspected. But
their main resource probably was in the obscurity, almost amounting to
unintelligibleness, of their responses. Their prophecies in most cases
required the comment of the event to make them understood; and it not
seldom happened, that the meaning in the sequel was found to be the
diametrically opposite of that which the pious votaries had originally
conceived.

In the mean time the obscurity of the oracles was of inexpressible
service to the cause of superstition. If the event turned out to be
such as could in no way be twisted to come within the scope of the
response, the pious suitor only concluded that the failure was owing
to the grossness and carnality of his own apprehension, and not to any
deficiency in the institution. Thus the oracle by no means lost credit,
even when its meaning remained for ever in its original obscurity. But,
when, by any fortunate chance, its predictions seemed to be verified,
then the unerringness of the oracle was lauded from nation to nation;
and the omniscience of the God was admitted with astonishment and
adoration.

It would be a vulgar and absurd mistake however, to suppose that all
this was merely the affair of craft, the multitude only being the
dupes, while the priests in cold blood carried on the deception, and
secretly laughed at the juggle they were palming on the world. They
felt their own importance; and they cherished it. They felt that they
were regarded by their countrymen as something more than human; and
the opinion entertained of them by the world around them, did not fail
to excite a responsive sentiment in their own bosoms. If their
contemporaries willingly ascribed to them an exclusive sacredness, by
how much stronger an impulse were they led fully to receive so
flattering a suggestion! Their minds were in a perpetual state of
exaltation; and they believed themselves specially favoured by the God
whose temple constituted their residence. A small matter is found
sufficient to place a creed which flatters all the passions of its
votaries, on the most indubitable basis. Modern philosophers think
that by their doctrine of gases they can explain all the appearances
of the Pythia; but the ancients, to whom this doctrine was unknown,
admitted these appearances as the undoubted evidence of an
interposition from heaven.

It is certainly a matter of the extremest difficulty, for us in
imagination to place ourselves in the situation of those who believed
in the ancient polytheistical creed. And yet these believers nearly
constituted the whole of the population of the kingdoms of antiquity.
Even those who professed to have shaken off the prejudices of their
education, and to rise above the absurdities of paganism, had still
some of the old leaven adhering to them. One of the last acts of the
life of Socrates, was to order the sacrifice of a cock to be made to
Aesculapius.

Now the creed of paganism is said to have made up to the number of
thirty thousand deities. Every kingdom, every city, every street, nay,
in a manner every house, had its protecting God. These Gods were
rivals to each other; and were each jealous of his own particular
province, and watchful against the intrusion of any neighbour deity
upon ground where he had a superior right. The province of each of
these deities was of small extent; and therefore their watchfulness
and jealousy of their appropriate honours do not enter into the
slightest comparison with the Providence of the God who directs the
concerns of the universe. They had ample leisure to employ in
vindicating their prerogatives. Prophecy was of all means the plainest
and most obvious for each deity to assert his existence, and to
inforce the reverence and submission of his votaries. Prophecy was
that species of interference which was least liable to the being
confuted and exposed. The oracles, as we have said, were delivered in
terms and phrases that were nearly unintelligible. If therefore they
met with no intelligible fulfilment, this lost them nothing; and, if
it gained them no additional credit, neither did it expose them to any
disgrace. Whereas every example, where the obscure prediction seemed
to tally with, and be illustrated by any subsequent event, was hailed
with wonder and applause, confirmed the faith of the true believers,
and was held forth as a victorious confutation of the doubts of the
infidel.


INVASION OF XERXES INTO GREECE.

It is particularly suitable in this place to notice the events which
took place at Delphi upon occasion of the memorable invasion of Xerxes
into Greece. This was indeed a critical moment for the heathen
mythology. The Persians were pointed and express in their hostility
against the altars and the temples of the Greeks. It was no sooner
known that the straits of Thermopylae had been forced, than the priests
consulted the God, as to whether they should bury the treasures of the
temple, so to secure them against the sacrilege of the invader. The
answer of the oracle was: "Let nothing be moved; the God is sufficient
for the protection of his rights." The inhabitants therefore of the
neighbourhood withdrew: only sixty men and the priest remained. The
Persians in the mean time approached. Previously to this however, the
sacred arms which were placed in the temple, were seen to be moved by
invisible hands, and deposited on the declivity which was on the
outside of the building. The invaders no sooner shewed themselves,
than a miraculous storm of thunder and lightning rebounded and flashed
among the multiplied hills which surrounded the sacred area, and
struck terror into all hearts. Two vast fragments were detached from
the top of mount Parnassus, and crushed hundreds in their fall. A
voice of warlike acclamation issued from within the walls. Dismay
seized the Persian troops. The Delphians then, rushing from their
caverns, and descending from the summits, attacked them with great
slaughter. Two persons, exceeding all human stature, and that were
said to be the demigods whose fanes were erected near the temple of
Apollo, joined in the pursuit, and extended the slaughter. [94] It has
been said that the situation of the place was particularly adapted to
this mode of defence. Surrounded and almost overhung with lofty
mountain-summits, the area of the city was inclosed within crags and
precipices. No way led to it but through defiles, narrow and steep,
shadowed with wood, and commanded at every step by fastnesses from
above. In such a position artificial fires and explosion might imitate
a thunder storm. Great pains had been taken, to represent the place as
altogether abandoned; and therefore the detachment of rocks from the
top of mount Parnassus, though effected by human hands, might appear
altogether supernatural.

Nothing can more forcibly illustrate the strength of the religious
feeling among the Greeks, than the language of the Athenian government
at the time of the second descent of the Persian armament upon their
territory, when they were again compelled to abandon their houses and
land to the invader. Mardonius said to them: "I am thus commissioned
by the king of Persia, he will release and give back to you your
country; he invites you to choose a further territory, whatever you
may think desirable, which he will guarantee to you to govern as you
shall judge fit. He will rebuild for you, without its costing you
either money or labour, the temples which in his former incursion he
destroyed with fire. It is in vain for you to oppose him by force, for
his armies are innumerable." To which the Athenians replied, "As long
as the sun pursues his course in the heavens, so long will we resist
the Persian invader." Then turning to the Spartan ambassadors who were
sent to encourage and animate them to persist, they added, "It is but
natural that your employers should apprehend that we might give way
and be discouraged. But there is no sum of money so vast, and no
region so inviting and fertile, that could buy us to concur in the
enslaving of Greece. Many and resistless are the causes which induce
us to this resolve. First and chiefest, the temples and images of the
Gods, which Xerxes has burned and laid in ruins, and which we are
called upon to avenge to the utmost, instead of forming a league with
him who made this devastation. Secondly, the consideration of the
Grecian race, the same with us in blood and in speech, the same in
religion and manners, and whose cause we will never betray. Know
therefore now, if you knew not before, that, as long as a single
Athenian survives, we will never swerve from the hostility to Persia
to which we have devoted ourselves."

Contemplating this magnanimous resolution, it is in vain for us to
reflect on the absurdity, incongruity and frivolousness, as we
apprehend it, of the pagan worship, inasmuch as we find, whatever we
may think of its demerits, that the most heroic people that ever
existed on earth, in the hour of their direst calamity, regarded a
zealous and fervent adherence to that religion as the most sacred of
all duties. [95]


DEMOCRITUS.

The fame of Democritus has sustained a singular fortune. He is
represented by Pliny as one of the most superstitious of mortals. This
character is founded on certain books which appeared in his name. In
these books he is made to say, that, if the blood of certain birds be
mingled together, the combination will produce a serpent, of which
whoever eats will become endowed with the gift of understanding the
language of birds. [96] He attributes a multitude of virtues to the
limbs of a dead camelion: among others that, if the left foot of this
animal be grilled, and there be added certain herbs, and a particular
unctuous preparation, it will have the quality to render the person
who carries it about him invisible. [97] But all this is wholly
irreconcileable with the known character of Democritus, who
distinguished himself by the hypothesis that the world was framed from
the fortuitous concourse of atoms, and that the soul died with the
body. And accordingly Lucian, [98] a more judicious author than Pliny,
expressly cites Democritus as the strenuous opposer of all the
pretenders to miracles. "Such juggling tricks," he says, "call for a
Democritus, an Epicurus, a Metrodorus, or some one of that temper, who
should endeavour to detect the illusion, and would hold it for certain,
even if he could not fully lay open the deceit, that the whole was a
lying pretence, and had not a spark of reality in it."

Democritus was in reality one of the most disinterested characters on
record in the pursuit of truth. He has been styled the father of
experimental philosophy. When his father died, and the estate came to
be divided between him and two brothers, he chose the part which was
in money, though the smallest, that he might indulge him [Errata:
_read_ himself] in travelling in pursuit of knowledge. He visited
Egypt and Persia, and turned aside into Ethiopia and India. He is
reported to have said, that he had rather be the possessor of one of
the cardinal secrets of nature, than of the diadem of Persia.


SOCRATES.

Socrates is the most eminent of the ancient philosophers. He lived in
the most enlightened age of Greece, and in Athens, the most illustrious
of her cities. He was born in the middle ranks of life, the son of a
sculptor. He was of a mean countenance, with a snub nose, projecting
eyes, and otherwise of an appearance so unpromising, that a
physiognomist, his contemporary, pronounced him to be given to the
grossest vices. But he was of a penetrating understanding, the simplest
manners, and a mind wholly bent on the study of moral excellence. He
at once abjured all the lofty pretensions, and the dark and recondite
pursuits of the most applauded teachers of his time, and led those to
whom he addressed his instructions from obvious and irresistible data
to the most unexpected and useful conclusions. There was something in
his manner of teaching that drew to him the noblest youth of Athens.
Plato and Xenophon, two of the most admirable of the Greek writers,
were among his pupils. He reconciled in his own person in a surprising
degree poverty with the loftiest principles of independence. He taught
an unreserved submission to the laws of our country. He several times
unequivocally displayed his valour in the field of battle, while at
the same time he kept aloof from public offices and trusts. The
serenity of his mind never forsook him. He was at all times ready to
teach, and never found it difficult to detach himself from his own
concerns, to attend to the wants and wishes of others. He was
uniformly courteous and unpretending; and, if at any time he indulged
in a vein of playful ridicule, it was only against the presumptuously
ignorant, and those who were without foundation wise in their own
conceit.

Yet, with all these advantages and perfections, the name of Socrates
would not have been handed down with such lustre to posterity but for
the manner of his death. He made himself many enemies. The plainness
of his manner and the simplicity of his instructions were inexpressibly
wounding to those (and they were many), who, setting up for professors,
had hitherto endeavoured to dazzle their hearers by the loftiness of
their claims, and to command from them implicit submission by the
arrogance with which they dictated. It must be surprising to us, that
a man like Socrates should be arraigned in a country like Athens upon
a capital accusation. He was charged with instilling into the youth a
disobedience to their duties, and propagating impiety to the Gods,
faults of which he was notoriously innocent. But the plot against him
was deeply laid, and is said to have been twenty years in the
concoction. And he greatly assisted the machinations of his
adversaries, by the wonderful firmness of his conduct upon his trial,
and his spirited resolution not to submit to any thing indirect and
pusillanimous. He defended himself with a serene countenance and the
most cogent arguments, but would not stoop to deprecation and intreaty.
When sentence was pronounced against him, this did not induce the
least alteration of his conduct. He did not think that a life which he
had passed for seventy years with a clear conscience, was worth
preserving by the sacrifice of honour. He refused to escape from
prison, when one of his rich friends had already purchased of the
jailor the means of his freedom. And, during the last days of his life,
and when he was waiting the signal of death, which was to be the return
of a ship that had been sent with sacrifices to Delos, he uttered those
admirable discourses, which have been recorded by Xenophon and Plato
to the latest posterity.

But the question which introduces his name into this volume, is that
of what is called the demon of Socrates. He said that he repeatedly
received a divine premonition of dangers impending over himself and
others; and considerable pains have been taken to ascertain the cause
and author of these premonitions. Several persons, among whom we may
include Plato, have conceived that Socrates regarded himself as
attended by a supernatural guardian who at all times watched over his
welfare and concerns.

But the solution is probably of a simpler nature. Socrates, with all
his incomparable excellencies and perfections, was not exempt from the
superstitions of his age and country. He had been bred up among the
absurdities of polytheism. In them were included, as we have seen, a
profound deference for the responses of oracles, and a vigilant
attention to portents and omens. Socrates appears to have been
exceedingly regardful of omens. Plato tells us that this intimation,
which he spoke of as his demon, never prompted him to any act, but
occasionally interfered to prevent him or his friends from proceeding
in any thing that would have been attended with injurious consequences.
[99] Sometimes he described it as a voice, which no one however heard
but himself; and sometimes it shewed itself in the act of sneezing. If
the sneezing came, when he was in doubt to do a thing or not to do it,
it confirmed him; but if, being already engaged in any act, he sneezed,
this he considered as a warning to desist. If any of his friends
sneezed on his right hand, he interpreted this as a favourable omen;
but, if on his left, he immediately relinquished his purpose. [100]
Socrates vindicated his mode of expressing himself on the subject, by
saying that others, when they spoke of omens, for example, by the
voice of a bird, said the bird told me this, but that he, knowing that
the omen was purely instrumental to a higher power, deemed it more
religious and respectful to have regard only to the higher power, and
to say that God had graciously warned him. [101] One of the examples
of this presage was, that, going along a narrow street with several
companions in earnest discourse, he suddenly stopped, and turned
another way, warning his friends to do the same. Some yielded to him,
and others went on, who were encountered by the rushing forward of a
multitude of hogs, and did not escape without considerable
inconvenience and injury. [102] In another instance one of a company
among whom was Socrates, had confederated to commit an act of
assassination. Accordingly he rose to quit the place, saying to
Socrates, "I will be back presently." Socrates, unaware of his purpose,
but having received the intimation of his demon, said to him earnestly,
"Go not." The conspirator sat down. Again however he rose, and again
Socrates stopped him. At length he escaped, without the observation of
the philosopher, and committed the act, for which he was afterwards
brought to trial. When led to execution, he exclaimed, "This would
never have happened to me, if I had yielded to the intimation of
Socrates." [103] In the same manner, and by a similar suggestion, the
philosopher predicted the miscarriage of the Athenian expedition to
Sicily under Nicias, which terminated with such signal disaster. [104]
This feature in the character of Socrates is remarkable, and may shew
the prevalence of superstitious observances, even in persons whom we
might think the most likely to be exempt from this weakness.




ROME.


VIRGIL.

From the Greeks let us turn to the Romans. The earliest examples to
our purpose occur in the Aeneid. And, though Virgil is a poet, yet is
he so correct a writer, that we may well take for granted, that he
either records facts which had been handed down by tradition, or that,
when he feigns, he feigns things strikingly in accord with the manners
and belief of the age of which he speaks.


POLYDORUS.

One of the first passages that occur, is of the ghost of the deceased
Polydorus on the coast of Thrace. Polydorus, the son of Priam, was
murdered by the king of that country, his host, for the sake of the
treasures he had brought with him from Troy. He was struck through
with darts made of the wood of the myrtle. The body was cast into a
pit, and earth thrown upon it. The stems of myrtle grew and flourished.
Aeneas, after the burning of Troy, first attempted a settlement in this
place. Near the spot where he landed he found a hillock thickly set
with myrtle. He attempted to gather some, thinking it might form a
suitable screen to an altar which he had just raised. To his
astonishment and horror he found the branches he had plucked, dropping
with blood. He tried the experiment again and again. At length a voice
from the mound was heard, exclaiming, "Spare me! I am Polydorus;" and
warning him to fly the blood-stained and treacherous shore.


DIDO.

We have a more detailed tale of necromancy, when Dido, deserted by
Aeneas, resolves on self-destruction. To delude her sister as to her
secret purpose, she sends for a priestess from the gardens of the
Hesperides, pretending that her object is by magical incantations
again to relumine the passion of love in the breast of Aeneas. This
priestess is endowed with the power, by potent verse to free the
oppressed soul from care, and by similar means to agitate the bosom
with passion which is free from its empire. She can arrest the
headlong stream, and cause the stars to return back in their orbits.
She can call up the ghosts of the dead. She is able to compel the
solid earth to rock, and the trees of the forest to descend from their
mountains. To give effect to the infernal spell, Dido commands that a
funeral pyre shall be set up in the interior court of her palace, and
that the arms of Aeneas, what remained of his attire, and the marriage
bed in which Dido had received him, shall be heaped upon it. The pyre
is hung round with garlands, and adorned with branches of cypress. The
sword of Aeneas and his picture are added. Altars are placed round the
pyre; and the priestess, with dishevelled hair, calls with terrific
charms upon her three hundred Gods, upon Erebus, chaos, and the
three-faced Hecate. She sprinkles around the waters of Avernus, and
adds certain herbs that had been cropped by moonlight with a sickle of
brass. She brings with her the excrescence which is found upon the
forehead of a new-cast foal, of the size of a dried fig, and which
unless first eaten by the mare, the mother never admits her young to
the nourishment of her milk. After these preparations, Dido, with
garments tucked up, and with one foot bare, approached the altars,
breaking over them a consecrated cake, and embracing them successively
in her arms. The pyre was then to be set on fire; and, as the
different objects placed upon it were gradually consumed, the charm
became complete, and the ends proposed to the ceremony were expected
to follow. Dido assures her sister, that she well knew the unlawfulness
of her proceeding, and protests that nothing but irresistible necessity
should have compelled her to have recourse to these unhallowed arts.
She finally stabs herself, and expires.


ROMULUS.

The early history of Rome is, as might be expected, interspersed with
prodigies. Romulus himself, the founder, after a prosperous reign of
many years, disappeared at last by a miracle. The king assembled his
army to a general review, when suddenly, in the midst of the ceremony,
a tempest arose, with vivid lightnings and tremendous crashes of
thunder. Romulus became enveloped in a cloud, and, when, shortly after,
a clear sky and serene heavens succeeded, the king was no more seen,
and the throne upon which he had sat appeared vacant. The people were
somewhat dissatisfied with the event, and appear to have suspected
foul play. But the next day Julius Proculus, a senator of the highest
character, shewed himself in the general assembly, and assured them,
that, with the first dawn of the morning, Romulus had stood before him,
and certified to him that the Gods had taken him up to their celestial
abodes, authorising him withal to declare to his citizens, that their
arms should be for ever successful against all their enemies. [105]


NUMA.

Numa was the second king of Rome: and, the object of Romulus having
been to render his people soldiers and invincible in war, Numa, an old
man and a philosopher, made it his purpose to civilise them, and
deeply to imbue them with sentiments of religion. He appears to have
imagined the thing best calculated to accomplish this purpose, was to
lead them by prodigies and the persuasion of an intercourse with the
invisible world. A shield fell from heaven in his time, which he
caused to be carefully kept and consecrated to the Gods; and he
conceived no means so likely to be effectual to this end, as to make
eleven other shields exactly like the one which had descended by
miracle, so that, if an accident happened to any one, the Romans might
believe that the one given to them by the divinity was still in their
possession.[106]

Numa gave to his people civil statutes, and a code of observances in
matters of religion; and these also were inforced with a divine
sanction. Numa met the goddess Egeria from time to time in a cave; and
by her was instructed in the institutions he should give to the Romans:
and this barbarous people, awed by the venerable appearance of their
king, by the sanctity of his manners, and still more by the divine
favour which was so signally imparted to him, received his mandates
with exemplary reverence, and ever after implicitly conformed
themselves to all that he had suggested. [107]


TULLUS HOSTILIUS.

Tullus Hostilius, the third king of Rome, restored again the policy of
Romulus. In his time, Alba, the parent state, was subdued and united
to its more flourishing colony. In the mean time Tullus, who during
the greater part of his reign had been distinguished by martial
achievements, in the latter part became the victim of superstitions.
A shower of stones fell from heaven, in the manner, as Livy tells us,
of a hail-storm. A plague speedily succeeded to this prodigy. [108]
Tullus, awed by these events, gave his whole attention to the rites of
religion. Among other things he found in the sacred books of Numa an
account of a certain ceremony, by which, if rightly performed, the
appearance of a God, named Jupiter Elicius, would be conjured up. But
Tullus, who had spent his best days in the ensanguined field, proved
inadequate to this new undertaking. Some defects having occurred in
his performance of the magical ceremony, not only no God appeared at
his bidding, but, the anger of heaven being awakened, a thunderbolt
fell on the palace, and the king, and the place of his abode were
consumed together. [109]


ACCIUS NAVIUS.

In the reign of Tarquinius Priscus, the fifth king of Rome, another
famous prodigy is recorded. The king had resolved to increase the
number of the Roman cavalry. Romulus had raised the first body with
the customary ceremony of augury. Tarquinius proposed to proceed in
the present case, omitting this ceremony. Accius Navius, the chief
augur, protested against the innovation. Tarquin, in contempt of his
interference, addressed Accius, saying, "Come, augur, consult your
birds, and tell me, whether the thing I have now in my mind can be
done, or cannot be done." Accius proceeded according to the rules of
his art, and told the king it could be done. "What I was thinking of,"
replied Tarquinius, "was whether you could cut this whetstone in two
with this razor." Accius immediately took the one instrument and the
other, and performed the prodigy in the face of the assembled people.
[110]


SERVIUS TULLIUS.

Servius Tullius, the sixth king of Rome, was the model of a
disinterested and liberal politician, and gave to his subjects those
institutions to which, more than to any other cause, they were indebted
for their subsequent greatness. Tarquinius subjected nearly the whole
people of Latium to his rule, capturing one town of this district
after another. In Corniculum, one of these places, Servius Tullius,
being in extreme youth, was made a prisoner of war, and subsequently
dwelt as a slave in the king's palace. One day as he lay asleep in the
sight of many, his head was observed to be on fire. The bystanders,
terrified at the spectacle, hastened to bring water that they might
extinguish the flames. The queen forbade their assiduity, regarding
the event as a token from the Gods. By and by the boy awoke of his own
accord, and the flames at the same instant disappeared. The queen,
impressed with the prodigy, became persuaded that the youth was
reserved for high fortunes, and directed that he should be instructed
accordingly in all liberal knowledge. In due time he was married to
the daughter of Tarquinius, and was destined in all men's minds to
succeed in the throne, which took place in the sequel. [111]

In the year of Rome two hundred and ninety one, forty-seven years
after the expulsion of Tarquin, a dreadful plague broke out in the
city, and carried off both the consuls, the augurs, and a vast
multitude of the people. The following year was distinguished by
numerous prodigies; fires were seen in the heavens, and the earth
shook, spectres appeared, and supernatural voices were heard, an ox
spoke, and a shower of raw flesh fell in the fields. Most of these
prodigies were not preternatural; the speaking ox was probably
received on the report of a single hearer; and the whole was invested
with exaggerated terror by means of the desolation of the preceding
year. [112]


THE SORCERESS OF VIRGIL.

Prodigies are plentifully distributed through the earlier parts of the
Roman history; but it is not our purpose to enter into a chronological
detail on the subject. And in reality those already given, except in
the instance of Tullus Hostilius, do not entirely fall within the
scope of the present volume. The Roman poets, Virgil, Horace, Ovid and
Lucan, give a fuller insight than the Latin prose-writers, into the
conceptions of their countrymen upon the subject of incantations and
magic.

The eighth eclogue of Virgil, entitled Pharmaceutria, is particularly
to our purpose in this point. There is an Idyll of Theocritus under
the same name; but it is of an obscurer character; and the enchantress
is not, like that of Virgil, triumphant in the success of her arts.

The sorceress is introduced by Virgil, giving direction to her female
attendant as to the due administration of her charms. Her object is to
recal Daphnis, whom she styles her husband, to his former love for her.
At the same time, she says, she will endeavour by magic to turn him
away from his wholesome sense. She directs her attendant to burn
vervain and frankincense; and she ascribes the highest efficacy to the
solemn chant, which, she says, can call down the moon from its sphere,
can make the cold-blooded snake burst in the field, and was the means
by which Circe turned the companions of Ulysses into beasts. She
orders his image to be thrice bound round with fillets of three
colours, and then that it be paraded about a prepared altar, while in
binding the knots the attendant shall still say, "Thus do I bind the
fillets of Venus." One image of clay and one of wax are placed before
the same fire; and as the image of clay hardens, so does the heart of
Daphnis harden towards his new mistress; and as the image of wax
softens, so is the heart of Daphnis made tender towards the sorceress.
She commands a consecrated cake to be broken over the image, and
crackling laurels to be burned before it, that as Daphnis had
tormented her by his infidelity, so he in his turn may be agitated
with a returning constancy. She prays that as the wanton heifer
pursues the steer through woods and glens, till at length, worn out
with fatigue, she lies down on the oozy reeds by the banks of the
stream, and the night-dew is unable to induce her to withdraw, so
Daphnis may be led on after her for ever with inextinguishable love.
She buries the relics of what had belonged to Daphnis beneath her
threshold. She bruises poisonous herbs of resistless virtue which had
been gathered in the kingdom of Pontus, herbs, which enabled him who
gave them to turn himself into a hungry wolf prowling amidst the
forests, to call up ghosts from the grave, and to translate the
ripened harvest from the field where it grew to the lands of another.
She orders her attendant to bring out to the face of heaven the ashes
of these herbs, and [Errata: _dele_ and] to cast them over her
head into the running stream, and at the same time taking care not to
look behind her. After all her efforts the sorceress begins to despair.
She says, "Daphnis heeds not my incantations, heeds not the Gods." She
looks again; she perceives the ashes on the altar emit sparkles of
fire; she hears her faithful house-dog bark before the door; she says,
"Can these things be; or do lovers dream what they desire? It is not
so! The real Daphnis comes; I hear his steps; he has left the deluding
town; he hastens to my longing arms!"


CANIDIA.

In the works of Horace occurs a frightful and repulsive, but a curious
detail of a scene of incantation. [113] Four sorceresses are
represented as assembled, Canidia, the principal, to perform, the other
three to assist in, the concoction of a charm, by means of which a
certain youth, named Varus, for whom Canidia had conceived a passion,
but who regards the hag with the utmost contempt, may be made
obsequious to her desires. Canidia appears first, the locks of her
dishevelled hair twined round with venomous and deadly serpents,
ordering the wild fig-tree and the funereal cypress to be rooted up
from the sepulchres on which they grew, and these, together with the
egg of a toad smeared with blood, the plumage of the screech-owl,
various herbs brought from Thessaly and Georgia, and bones torn from
the jaws of a famished dog, to be burned in flames fed with perfumes
from Colchis. Of the assistant witches, one traces with hurried steps
the edifice, sprinkling it, as she goes, with drops from the Avernus,
her hair on her head stiff and erect, like the quills of the
sea-hedge-hog, or the bristles of a hunted boar; and another, who is
believed by all the neighbourhood to have the faculty of conjuring the
stars and the moon down from heaven, contributes her aid.

But, which is most horrible, the last of the assistant witches is seen,
armed with a spade, and, with earnest and incessant labour, throwing
up earth, that she may dig a trench, in which is to be plunged up to
his chin a beardless youth, stripped of his purple robe, the emblem of
his noble descent, and naked, that, from his marrow already dry and
his liver (when at length his eye-balls, long fixed on the still
renovated food which is withheld from his famished jaws, have no more
the power to discern), may be concocted the love-potion, from which
these hags promise themselves the most marvellous results.

Horace presents before us the helpless victim of their malice, already
inclosed in the fatal trench, first viewing their orgies with affright,
asking, by the Gods who rule the earth and all the race of mortals,
what means the tumult around him? He then intreats Canidia, by her
children if ever she had offspring, by the visible evidences of his
high rank, and by the never-failing vengeance of Jupiter upon such
misdeeds, to say why she casts on him glances, befitting the fury of a
stepmother, or suited to a beast already made desperate by the wounds
of the hunter.

At length, no longer exhausting himself in fruitless intreaties, the
victim has recourse in his agonies to curses on his executioners. He
says, his ghost shall haunt them for ever, for no vengeance can
expiate such cruelty. He will tear their cheeks with his fangs, for
that power is given to the shades below. He will sit, a night-mare, on
their bosoms, driving away sleep from their eyes; while the enraged
populace shall pursue them with stones, and the wolves shall gnaw and
howl over their unburied members. The unhappy youth winds up all with
the remark, that his parents who will survive him, shall themselves
witness this requital of the sorceresses' infernal deeds.

Canidia, unmoved by these menaces and execrations, complains of the
slow progress of her charms. She gnaws her fingers with rage. She
invokes the night and the moon, beneath whose rays these preparations
are carried on, now, while the wild beasts lie asleep in the forests,
and while the dogs alone bay the superanuated letcher, who relies
singly on the rich scents with which he is perfumed for success, to
speed her incantations, and signalise their power beneath the roof of
him whose love she seeks. She impatiently demands why her drugs should
be of less avail than those of Medea, with which she poisoned a
garment, that, once put on, caused Creusa, daughter of the king of
Corinth, to expire in intolerable torments? She discovers that Varus
had hitherto baffled her power by means of some magical antidote; and
she resolves to prepare a mightier charm, that nothing from earth or
hell shall resist. "Sooner," she says, "shall the sky be swallowed up
in the sea, and the earth be stretched a covering over both, than thou,
my enemy, shalt not be wrapped in the flames of love, as subtle and
tenacious as those of burning pitch."

It is not a little curious to remark the operation of the antagonist
principles of superstition and scepticism among the Romans in this
enlightened period, as it comes illustrated to us in the compositions
of Horace on this subject. In the piece, the contents of which have
just been given, things are painted in all the solemnity and terror
which is characteristic of the darkest ages. But, a few pages further
on, we find the poet in a mock Palinodia deprecating the vengeance of
the sorceress, who, he says, has already sufficiently punished him by
turning through her charms his flaxen hair to hoary white, and
overwhelming him by day and night with ceaseless anxieties. He feels
himself through her powerful magic tortured, like Hercules in the
envenomed shirt of Nessus, or as if he were cast down into the flames
of Aetna; nor does he hope that she will cease compounding a thousand
deadly ingredients against him, till his very ashes shall have been
scattered by the resistless winds. He offers therefore to expiate his
offence at her pleasure either by a sacrifice of an hundred oxen, or
by a lying ode, in which her chastity and spotless manners shall be
applauded to the skies.

What Ovid gives is only a new version of the charms and philtres of
Medea. [114]


ERICHTHO.

Lucan, in his Pharsalia, [115] takes occasion, immediately before the
battle which was to decide the fate of the Roman world, to introduce
Sextus, the younger son of Pompey, as impatient to enquire, even by
the most sacrilegious means, into the important events which are
immediately impending. He is encouraged in the attempt by the
reflection, that the soil upon which they are now standing, Thessaly,
had been notorious for ages as the noxious and unwholesome seat of
sorcery and witchcraft. The poet therefore embraces this occasion to
expatiate on the various modes in which this detested art was
considered as displaying itself. And, however he may have been
ambitious to seize this opportunity to display the wealth of his
imagination, the whole does not fail to be curious, as an exhibition
of the system of magical power so far as the matter in hand is
concerned.

The soil of Thessaly, says the poet, is in the utmost degree fertile
in poisonous herbs, and her rocks confess the power of the sepulchral
song of the magician. There a vegetation springs up of virtue to
compel the Gods; and Colchis itself imports from Thessaly treasures of
this sort which she cannot boast as her own. The chaunt of the
Thessalian witch penetrates the furthest seat of the Gods, and
contains words so powerful, that not the care of the skies, or of the
revolving spheres, can avail as an excuse to the deities to decline
its force. Babylon and Memphis yield to the superior might; and the
Gods of foreign climes fly to fulfil the dread behests of the magician.

Prompted by Thessalian song, love glides into the hardest hearts; and
even the severity of age is taught to burn with youthful fires. The
ingredients of the poisoned cup, nor the excrescence found on the
forehead of the new-cast foal, can rival in efficacy the witching
incantation. The soul is melted by its single force. The heart which
not all the attractions of the genial bed could fire, nor the
influence of the most beautiful form, the wheel of the sorceress shall
force from its bent.

But the effects are perhaps still more marvellous that are produced on
inanimate and unintellectual nature. The eternal succession of the
world is suspended; day delays to rise on the earth; the skies no
longer obey their ruler. Nature becomes still at the incantation: and
Jove, accustomed to guide the machine, is astonished to find the poles
disobedient to his impulse. Now the sorceress deluges the plains with
rain, hides the face of heaven with murky clouds, and the thunders
roll, unbidden by the thunderer. Anon she shakes her hair, and the
darkness is dispersed, and the whole horizon is cleared. At one time
the sea rages, urged by no storm; and at another is smooth as glass,
in defiance of the tempestuous North. The breath of the enchanter
carries along the bark in the teeth of the wind; the headlong torrent
is suspended, and rivers run back to their source. The Nile overflows
not in the summer; the crooked Meander shapes to itself a direct
course; the sluggish Arar gives new swiftness to the rapid Rhone; and
the mountains bow their heads to their foundations. Clouds shroud the
peaks of the cloudless Olympus; and the Scythian snows dissolve,
unurged by the sun. The sea, though impelled by the tempestuous
constellations, is counteracted by witchcraft, and no longer beats
along the shore. Earthquakes shake the solid globe; and the affrighted
inhabitants behold both hemispheres at once. The animals most dreaded
for their fury, and whose rage is mortal, become tame; the hungry
tiger and the lordly lion fawn at the sorceress's feet; the snake
untwines all her folds amidst the snow; the viper, divided by wounds,
unites again its severed parts; and the envenomed serpent pines and
dies under the power of a breath more fatal than his own.

What, exclaims the poet, is the nature of the compulsion thus
exercised on the Gods, this obedience to song and to potent herbs,
this fear to disobey and scorn the enchanter? Do they yield from
necessity, or is it a voluntary subjection? Is it the piety of these
hags that obtains the reward, or by menaces do they secure their
purpose? Are all the Gods subject to this control, or, is there one
God upon whom it has power, who, himself compelled, compels the
elements? The stars fall from heaven at their command. The silver moon
yields to their execrations, and burns with a smouldering flame, even
as when the earth comes between her and the sun, and by its shadow
intercepts its rays; thus is the moon brought lower and more low, till
she covers with her froth the herbs destined to receive her malignant
influence.

But Erichtho, the witch of the poet, flouts all these arts, as too
poor and timid for her purposes. She never allows a roof to cover her
horrid head, or confesses the influence of the Houshold Gods. She
inhabits the deserted tomb, and dwells in a grave from which the ghost
of the dead has been previously expelled. She knows the Stygian abodes,
and the counsels of the infernals. Her countenance is lean; and her
complexion overspread with deadly paleness. Her hair is neglected and
matted. But when clouds and tempests obscure the stars, then she comes
forth, and defies the midnight lightning. Wherever she treads, the
fruits of the earth become withered, and the wholesome air is poisoned
with her breath. She offers no prayers, and pours forth no
supplications; she has recourse to no divination. She delights to
profane the sacred altar with a funereal flame, and pollutes the
incense with a torch from the pyre. The Gods yield at once to her
voice, nor dare to provoke her to a second mandate. She incloses the
living man within the confines of the grave; she subjects to sudden
death those who were destined to a protracted age; and she brings back
to life the corses of the dead. She snatches the smoaking cinders,
and the bones whitened with flame, from the midst of the pile, and
wrests the torch from the hand of the mourning parent. She seizes the
fragments of the burning shroud, and the embers yet moistened with
blood. But, where the sad remains are already hearsed in marble, it is
there that she most delights to exercise her sacrilegious power. She
tears the limbs of the dead, and digs out their eyes. She gnaws their
fingers. She separates with her teeth the rope on the gibbet, and
tears away the murderer from the cross on which he hung suspended. She
applies to her purposes the entrails withered with the wind, and the
marrow that had been dried by the sun. She bears away the nails which
had pierced the hands and feet of the criminal, the clotted blood
which had distilled from his wounds, and the sinews that had held him
suspended. She pounces upon the body of the dead in the battle-field,
anticipating the vulture and the beast of prey; but she does not
divide the limbs with a knife, nor tear them asunder with her hands:
she watches the approach of the wolf, that she may wrench the morsels
from his hungry jaws. Nor does the thought of murder deter her, if her
rites require the living blood, first spurting from the lacerated
throat. She drags forth the foetus from its pregnant mother, by a
passage which violence has opened. Wherever there is occasion for a
bolder and more remorseless ghost, with her own hand she dismisses him
from life; man at every period of existence furnishes her with
materials. She drags away the first down from the cheek of the
stripling, and with her left hand cuts the favourite lock from the
head of the young man. Often she watches with seemingly pious care the
dying hours of a relative, and seizes the occasion to bite his lips,
to compress his windpipe, and whisper in his expiring organ some
message to the infernal shades.

Sextus, guided by the general fame of this woman, sought her in her
haunts. He chose his time, in the depth of the night, when the sun is
at its lowermost distance from the upper sky. He took his way through
the desert fields. He took for companions the associates, the
accustomed ministers of his crimes. Wandering among broken graves and
crumbling sepulchres, they discovered her, sitting sublime on a ragged
rock, where mount Haemus stretches its roots to the Pharsalic field.
She was mumbling charms of the Magi and the magical Gods. For she
feared that the war might yet be transferred to other than the
Emathian fields. The sorceress was busy therefore enchanting the soil
of Philippi, and scattering on its surface the juice of potent herbs,
that it might be heaped with carcasses of the dead, and saturated with
their blood, that Macedon, and not Italy, might receive the bodies of
departed kings and the bones of the noble, and might be amply peopled
with the shades of men. Her choicest labour was as to the earth where
should be deposited the prostrate Pompey, or the limbs of the mighty
Caesar.

Sextus approached, and bespoke her thus: "Oh, glory of Haemonia, that
hast the power to divulge the fates of men, or canst turn aside fate
itself from its prescribed course, I pray thee to exercise thy gift in
disclosing events to come. Not the meanest of the Roman race am I, the
offspring of an illustrious chieftain, lord of the world in the one
case, or in the other the destined heir to my father's calamity. I
stand on a tremendous and giddy height: snatch me from this posture of
doubt; let me not blindly rush on, and blindly fall; extort this
secret from the Gods, or force the dead to confess what they know."

To whom the Thessalian crone replied: "If you asked to change the fate
of an individual, though it were to restore an old man, decrepid with
age, to vigorous youth, I could comply; but to break the eternal chain
of causes and consequences exceeds even our power. You seek however
only a foreknowledge of events to come, and you shall be gratified.
Meanwhile it were best, where slaughter has afforded so ample a field,
to select the body of one newly deceased, and whose flexible organs
shall be yet capable of speech, not with lineaments already hardened
in the sun."

Saying thus, Erichtho proceeded (having first with her art made the
night itself more dark, and involved her head in a pitchy cloud), to
explore the field, and examine one by one the bodies of the unburied
dead. As she approached, the wolves fled before her, and the birds of
prey, unwillingly sheathing their talons, abandoned their repast,
while the Thessalian witch, searching into the vital parts of the
frames before her, at length fixed on one whose lungs were uninjured,
and whose organs of speech had sustained no wound. The fate of many
hung in doubt, till she had made her selection. Had the revival of
whole armies been her will, armies would have stood up obedient to her
bidding. She passed a hook beneath the jaw of the selected one, and,
fastening it to a cord, dragged him along over rocks and stones, till
she reached a cave, overhung by a projecting ridge. A gloomy fissure
in the ground was there, of a depth almost reaching to the Infernal
Gods, where the yew-tree spread thick its horizontal branches, at all
times excluding the light of the sun. Fearful and withering shade was
there, and noisome slime cherished by the livelong night. The air was
heavy and flagging as that of the Taenarian promontory; and hither the
God of hell permits his ghosts to extend their wanderings. It is
doubtful whether the sorceress called up the dead to attend her here,
or herself descended to the abodes of Pluto. She put on a fearful and
variegated robe; she covered her face with her dishevelled hair, and
bound her brow with a wreath of vipers.

Meanwhile she observed Sextus afraid, with his eyes fixed on the
ground, and his companions trembling; and thus she reproached them.
"Lay aside," she said, "your vainly-conceived terrors! You shall
behold only a living and a human figure, whose accents you may listen
to with perfect security. If this alarms you, what would you say, if
you should have seen the Stygian lakes, and the shores burning with
sulphur unconsumed, if the furies stood before you, and Cerberus with
his mane of vipers, and the giants chained in eternal adamant? Yet all
these you might have witnessed unharmed; for all these would quail at
the terror of my brow."

She spoke, and next plied the dead body with her arts. She supples his
wounds, and infuses fresh blood into his veins: she frees his scars
from the clotted gore, and penetrates them with froth from the moon.
She mixes whatever nature has engendered in its most fearful caprices,
foam from the jaws of a mad dog, the entrails of the lynx, the backbone
of the hyena, and the marrow of a stag that had dieted on serpents,
the sinews of the remora, and the eyes of a dragon, the eggs of the
eagle, the flying serpent of Arabia, the viper that guards the pearl
in the Red Sea, the slough of the hooded snake, and the ashes that
remain when the phoenix has been consumed. To these she adds all venom
that has a name, the foliage of herbs over which she has sung her
charms, and on which she had voided her rheum as they grew.

At length she chaunts her incantation to the Stygian Gods, in a voice
compounded of all discords, and altogether alien to human organs. It
resembles at once the barking of a dog, and the howl of a wolf; it
consists of the hooting of the screech-owl, the yelling of a ravenous
wild beast, and the fearful hiss of a serpent. It borrows somewhat
from the roar of tempestuous waves, the hollow rushing of the winds
among the branches of the forest, and the tremendous crash of
deafening thunder.

"Ye furies," she cries, "and dreadful Styx, ye sufferings of the
damned, and Chaos, for ever eager to destroy the fair harmony of
worlds, and thou, Pluto, condemned to an eternity of ungrateful
existence, Hell, and Elysium, of which no Thessalian witch shall
partake, Proserpine, for ever cut off from thy health-giving mother,
and horrid Hecate, Cerebrus [Errata: _read_ Cerberus] curst with
incessant hunger, ye Destinies, and Charon endlessly murmuring at the
task I impose of bringing back the dead again to the land of the
living, hear me!--if I call on you with a voice sufficiently impious
and abominable, if I have never sung this chaunt, unsated with human
gore, if I have frequently laid on your altars the fruit of the
pregnant mother, bathing its contents with the reeking brain, if I
have placed on a dish before you the head and entrails of an infant on
the point to be born--

"I ask not of you a ghost, already a tenant of the Tartarean abodes,
and long familiarised to the shades below, but one who has recently
quitted the light of day, and who yet hovers over the mouth of hell:
let him hear these incantations, and immediately after descend to his
destined place! Let him articulate suitable omens to the son of his
general, having so late been himself a soldier of the great Pompey! Do
this, as you love the very sound and rumour of a civil war!"

Saying this, behold, the ghost of the dead man stood erect before her,
trembling at the view of his own unanimated limbs, and loth to enter
again the confines of his wonted prison. He shrinks to invest himself
with the gored bosom, and the fibres from which death had separated
him. Unhappy wretch, to whom death had not given the privilege to die!
Erichtho, impatient at the unlooked for delay, lashes the unmoving
corpse with one of her serpents. She calls anew on the powers of hell,
and threatens to pronounce the dreadful name, which cannot be
articulated without consequences never to be thought of, nor without
the direst necessity to be ventured upon.

At length the congealed blood becomes liquid and warm; it oozes from
the wounds, and creeps steadily along the veins and the members; the
fibres are called into action beneath the gelid breast, and the nerves
once more become instinct with life. Life and death are there at once.
The arteries beat; the muscles are braced; the body raises itself, not
by degrees, but at a single impulse, and stands erect. The eyelids
unclose. The countenance is not that of a living subject, but of the
dead. The paleness of the complexion, the rigidity of the lines,
remain; and he looks about with an unmeaning stare, but utters no
sound. He waits on the potent enchantress.

"Speak!" said she; "and ample shall be your reward. You shall not
again be subject to the art of the magician. I will commit your
members to such a sepulchre; I will burn your form with such wood, and
will chaunt such a charm over your funeral pyre, that all incantations
shall thereafter assail you in vain. Be it enough, that you have once
been brought back to life! Tripods, and the voice of oracles deal in
ambiguous responses; but the voice of the dead is perspicuous and
certain to him who receives it with an unshrinking spirit. Spare not!
Give names to things; give places a clear designation; speak with a
full and articulate voice."

Saying this, she added a further spell, qualified to give to him who
was to answer, a distinct knowledge of that respecting which he was
about to be consulted. He accordingly delivers the responses demanded
of him; and, that done, earnestly requires of the witch to be
dismissed. Herbs and magic rites are necessary, that the corpse may be
again unanimated, and the spirit never more be liable to be recalled
to the realms of day. The sorceress constructs the funeral pile; the
dead man places himself thereon; Erichtho applies the torch; and the
charm is for ever at an end.

Lucan in this passage is infinitely too precise, and exhausts his muse
in a number of particulars, where he had better have been more
succinct and select. He displays the prolific exuberance of a young
poet, who had not yet taught himself the multiplied advantages of
compression. He had not learned the principle, _Relinquere quae
desperat tractata nitescere posse_. [116] But, as this is the
fullest enumeration of the forms of witchcraft that occurs in the
writers of antiquity, it seemed proper to give it to the reader
entire.


SERTORIUS.

The story of Sertorius and his hind, which occurred about thirty years
before, may not be improperly introduced here. It is told by Plutarch
in the spirit of a philosopher, and as a mere deception played by that
general, to render the barbarous people of Spain more devoted to his
service. But we must suppose that it had, at least for the time, the
full effect of something preternatural. Sertorius was one of the most
highly gifted and well balanced characters that is to be found in
Roman story. He considered with the soundest discernment the nature of
the persons among whom he was to act, and conducted himself
accordingly. The story in Plutarch is this.

"So soone as Sertorius arriued from Africa, he straight leauied men of
warre, and with them subdued the people of Spaine fronting upon his
marches, of which the more part did willingly submit themselves, upon
the bruit that ran of him to be mercifull and courteous, and a valiant
man besides in present danger, Furthermore, he lacked no fine deuises
and subtilties to win their goodwils: as among others, the policy, and
deuise of the hind. There was a poore man of the countrey called
Spanus, who meeting by chance one day with a hind in his way that had
newly calved, flying from the hunters, he let the damme go, not being
able to take her; and running after her calfe tooke it, which was a
young hind, and of a strange haire, for she was all milk-white. It
chanced so, that Sertorius was at that time in those parts. So, this
poore man presented Sertorius with his young hind, which he gladly
receiued, and which with time he made so tame, that she would come to
him when he called her, and follow him where-euer he went, being
nothing the wilder for the daily sight of such a number of armed
souldiers together as they were, nor yet afraid of the noise and
tumult of the campe. Insomuch as Sertorius by little and little made
it a miracle, making the simple barbarous people beleeue that it was a
gift that Diana had sent him, by the which she made him understand of
many and sundrie things to come: knowing well inough of himselfe, that
the barbarous people were men easily deceiued, and quickly caught by
any subtill superstition, besides that by art also he brought them to
beleeue it as a thing verie true. For when he had any secret
intelligence giuen him, that the enemies would inuade some part of the
countries and prouinces subject vnto him, or that they had taken any
of his forts from him by any intelligence or sudden attempt, he
straight told them that his hind spake to him as he slept, and had
warned him both to arme his men, and put himselfe in strength. In like
manner if he had heard any newes that one of his lieutenants had wonne
a battell, or that he had any aduantage of his enemies, he would hide
the messenger, and bring his hind abroad with a garland and coller of
nosegayes: and then say, it was a token of some good newes comming
towards him, perswading them withall to be of good cheare; and so did
sacrifice to the Gods, to giue them thankes for the good tidings he
should heare before it were long. Thus by putting this superstition
into their heades, he made them the more tractable and obedient to his
will, in so much as they thought they were not now gouerned any more
by a stranger wiser than themselues, but were steadfastly perswaded
that they were rather led by some certaine God."--

"Now was Sertorius very heauie, that no man could tell him what was
become of his white hind: for thereby all his subtilltie and finenesse
to keepe the barbarous people in obedience was taken away, and then
specially when they stood in need of most comfort. But by good hap,
certaine of his souldiers that had lost themselves in the night, met
with the hind in their way, and knowing her by her colour, tooke her
and brought her backe againe. Sertorius hearing of her, promised them
a good reward, so that they would tell no liuing creature that they
brought her againe, and thereupon made her to be secretly kept. Then
within a few dayes after, he came abroad among them, and with a
pleasant countenance told the noble men and chiefe captaines of these
barbarous people, how the Gods had reuealed it to him in his dreame,
that he should shortly have a maruellous good thing happen to him: and
with these words sate downe in his chaire to give audience. Whereupon
they that kept the hind not farre from thence, did secretly let her go.
The hind being loose, when she had spied Sertorius, ranne straight to
his chaire with great joy, and put her head betwixt his legges, and
layed her mouth in his right hand, as she before was wont to do.
Sertorius also made very much of her, and of purpose appeared
maruellous glad, shewing such tender affection to the hind, as it
seemed the water stood in his eyes for joy. The barbarous people that
stood there by and beheld the same, at the first were much amazed
therewith, but afterwards when they had better bethought themselues,
for ioy they clapped their hands together, and waited upon Sertorius
to his lodging with great and ioyfull shouts, saying, and steadfastly
beleeuing, that he he was a heavenly creature, and beloued of the
Gods." [117]


CASTING OUT DEVILS.

We are now brought down to the era of the Christian religion; and
there is repeated mention of sorcery in the books of the New Testament.

One of the most frequent miracles recorded of Jesus Christ is called
the "casting out devils." The Pharisees in the Evangelist, for the
purpose of depreciating this evidence of his divine mission, are
recorded to have said, "this fellow doth not cast out devils, but by
Beelzebub, the prince of devils." Jesus, among other remarks in
refutation of this opprobrium, rejoins upon them, "If I by Beelzebub
cast out devils, by whom do your children cast them out?" [118] Here
then we have a plain insinuation of sorcery from the lips of Christ
himself, at the same time that he appears to admit that his
adversaries produced supernatural achievements similar to his own.


SIMON MAGUS.

But the most remarkable passage in the New Testament on the subject of
sorcery, is one which describes the proceedings of Simon Magus, as
follows.

"Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and preached Christ
unto them. But there was a certain man, called Simon, which before
time in the same city used sorcery, and bewitched the people of
Samaria, giving out that himself was some great one. To whom they all
gave heed, from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the
great power of God. And to him they had regard, because that of long
time he had bewitched them with sorceries. But, when they believed
Philip, preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God and the
name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women. Then
Simon himself believed also. And, when he was baptized, he continued
with Philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs which were
done.

"Now, when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had
received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John. Who,
when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the
Holy Ghost. For as yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Then laid they their hands on
them, and they received the Holy Ghost.

"And, when Simon saw that, through the laying on of the apostles'
hands, the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money, saying, Give
me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands he may receive the
Holy Ghost. But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee!
because thou hast thought that the gift of God might be purchased with
money. Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is
not right in the sight of God. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness,
and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee:
for I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the
bond of iniquity. Then answered Simon, and said, Pray ye to the Lord
for me, that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me."
[119]

This passage of the New Testament leaves us in considerable uncertainty
as to the nature of the sorceries, by which "of a long time Simon had
bewitched the people of Samaria." But the fathers of the church,
Clemens Romanus and Anastasius Sinaita, have presented us with a
detail of the wonders he actually performed. When and to whom he
pleased he made himself invisible; he created a man out of air; he
passed through rocks and mountains without encountering an obstacle;
he threw himself from a precipice uninjured; he flew along in the air;
he flung himself in the fire without being burned. Bolts and chains
were impotent to detain him. He animated statues, so that they
appeared to every beholder to be men and women; he made all the
furniture of the house and the table to change places as required,
without a visible mover; he metamorphosed his countenance and visage
into that of another person; he could make himself into a sheep, or a
goat, or a serpent; he walked through the streets attended with a
multitude of strange figures, which he affirmed to be the souls of the
departed; he made trees and branches of trees suddenly to spring up
where he pleased; he set up and deposed kings at will; he caused a
sickle to go into a field of corn, which unassisted would mow twice as
fast as the most industrious reaper. [120]

Thus endowed, it is difficult to imagine what he thought he would have
gained by purchasing from the apostles their gift of working miracles.
But Clemens Romanus informs us that he complained that, in his
sorceries, he was obliged to employ tedious ceremonies and
incantations; whereas the apostles appeared to effect their wonders
without difficulty and effort, by barely speaking a word. [121]


ELYMAS, THE SORCERER.

But Simon Magus is not the only magician spoken of in the New
Testament. When the apostle Paul came to Paphos in the isle of Cyprus,
he found the Roman governor divided in his preference between Paul and
Elymas, the sorcerer, who before the governor withstood Paul to his
face. Then Paul, prompted by his indignation, said, "Oh, full of all
subtlety and mischief, child of the devil, enemy of all righteousness,
wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? And now,
behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind,
not seeing the sun for a season." What wonders Elymas effected to
deceive the Roman governor we are not told: but "immediately there
fell on him a mist and a darkness; and he went about, seeking some to
lead him by the hand." [122]

In another instance we find certain vagabond Jews, exorcists, who
pretended to cast out devils from the possessed. But they came to the
apostle, and "confessed, and shewed their deeds. Many of them also
which used curious arts, brought their books together, and burned them
before all. And they counted the price of them, and found it fifty
thousand pieces of silver." [123]

It is easy to see however on which side the victory lay. The apostles
by their devotion and the integrity of their proceedings triumphed;
while those whose only motive was selfishness, the applause of the
vulgar, or the admiration of the superficial, gained the honours of a
day, and were then swept away into the gulf of general oblivion.


NERO.

The arts of the magician are said to have been called into action by
Nero upon occasion of the assassination of his mother, Agrippina. He
was visited with occasional fits of the deepest remorse in the
recollection of his enormity. Notwithstanding all the ostentatious
applauses and congratulations which he obtained from the senate, the
army and the people, he complained that he was perpetually haunted
with the ghost of his mother, and pursued by the furies with flaming
torches and whips. He therefore caused himself to be attended by
magicians, who employed their arts to conjure up the shade of
Agrippina, and to endeavour to obtain her forgiveness for the crime
perpetrated by her son. [124] We are not informed of the success of
their evocations.


VESPASIAN.

In the reign of Vespasian we meet with a remarkable record of
supernatural power, though it does not strictly fall under the head of
magic. It is related by both Tacitus and Suetonius. Vespasian having
taken up his abode for some months at Alexandria, a blind man, of the
common people, came to him, earnestly intreating the emperor to assist
in curing his infirmity, alleging that he was prompted to apply by the
admonition of the God Serapis, and importuning the prince to anoint
his cheeks and the balls of his eyes with the royal spittle. Vespasian
at first treated the supplication with disdain; but at length, moved
by the fervour of the petitioner, inforced as it was by the flattery
of his courtiers, the emperor began to think that every thing would
give way to his prosperous fortune, and yielded to the poor man's
desire. With a confident carriage therefore, the multitude of those
who stood by being full of expectation, he did as he was requested,
and the desired success immediately followed. Another supplicant
appeared at the same time, who had lost the use of his hands, and
intreated Vespasian to touch the diseased members with his foot; and
he also was cured.[125]

Hume has remarked that many circumstances contribute to give
authenticity to this miracle, "if," as he says, "any evidence could
avail to establish so palpable a falsehood. The gravity, solidity, age
and probity of so great an emperor, who, through the whole course of
his life, conversed in a familiar manner with his friends and
courtiers, and never affected any airs of divinity: the historian, a
contemporary writer, noted for candour and veracity, and perhaps the
greatest and most penetrating genius of all antiquity: and lastly, the
persons from whose authority he related the miracle, who we may
presume to have been of established character for judgment and honour;
eye-witnesses of the fact, and confirming their testimony, as Tacitus
goes on to say, after the Flavian family ceased to be in power, and
could no longer give any reward as the price of a lie." [126]


APOLLONIUS OF TYANA.

Apollonius of Tyana in Asia Minor was born nearly at the same time as
Jesus Christ, and acquired great reputation while he lived, and for a
considerable time after. He was born of wealthy parents, and seems
early to have betrayed a passion for philosophy. His father,
perceiving this, placed him at fourteen years of age under Euthydemus,
a rhetorician of Tarsus; but the youth speedily became dissatisfied
with the indolence and luxury of the citizens, and removed himself to
Aegas, a neighbouring town, where was a temple of Aesculapius, and where
the God was supposed sometimes to appear in person. Here he became
professedly a disciple of the sect of Pythagoras. He refrained from
animal food, and subsisted entirely on fruits and herbs. He went
barefoot, and wore no article of clothing made from the skins of
animals. [127] He further imposed on himself a noviciate of five years
silence. At the death of his father, he divided his patrimony equally
with his brother; and, that brother having wasted his estate by
prodigality, he again made an equal division with him of what
remained. [128] He travelled to Babylon and Susa in pursuit of
knowledge, and even among the Brachmans of India, and appears
particularly to have addicted himself to the study of magic. [129] He
was of a beautiful countenance and a commanding figure, and, by means
of these things, combined with great knowledge, a composed and
striking carriage, and much natural eloquence, appears to have won
universal favour wherever he went. He is said to have professed the
understanding of all languages without learning them, to read the
thoughts of men, and to be able to interpret the language of animals.
A power of working miracles attended him in all places. [130]

On one occasion he announced to the people of Ephesus the approach of
a terrible pestilence; but the citizens paid no attention to his
prophecy. The calamity however having overtaken them, they sent to
Apollonius who was then at Smyrna, to implore his assistance. He
obeyed the summons. Having assembled the inhabitants, there was seen
among them a poor, old and decrepid beggar, clothed in rags, hideous
of visage, and with a peculiarly fearful and tremendous expression in
his eyes. Apollonius called out to the Ephesians, "This is an enemy to
the Gods; turn all your animosity against him, and stone him to death!"
The old man in the most piteous tones besought their mercy. The
citizens were shocked with the inhumanity of the prophet. Some however
of the more thoughtless flung a few stones, without any determined
purpose. The old man, who had stood hitherto crouching, and with his
eyes half-closed, now erected his figure, and cast on the crowd
glances, fearful, and indeed diabolical. The Ephesians understood at
once that this was the genius of the plague. They showered upon him
stones without mercy, so as not only to cover him, but to produce a
considerable mound where he had stood. After a time Apollonius
commanded them to take away the stones, that they might discover what
sort of an enemy they had destroyed. Instead of a man they now saw an
enormous black dog, of the size of a lion, and whose mouth and jaws
were covered with a thick envenomed froth. [131]

Another miracle was performed by Apollonius in favour of a young man,
named Menippus of Corinth, five and twenty years of age, for whom the
prophet entertained a singular favour. This man conceived himself to
be beloved by a rich and beautiful woman, who made advances to him,
and to whom he was on the point of being contracted in marriage.
Apollonius warned his young friend against the match in an enigmatical
way, telling him that he nursed a serpent in his bosom. This however
did not deter Menippus. All things were prepared; and the wedding
table was spread. Apollonius meanwhile came among them, and prevented
the calamity. He told the young man that the dishes before him, the
wine he was drinking, the vessels of gold and silver that appeared
around him, and the very guests themselves were unreal and illusory;
and to prove his words, he caused them immediately to vanish. The
bride alone was refractory. She prayed the philosopher not to torment
her, and not to compel her to confess what she was. He was however
inexorable. She at length owned that she was an empuse (a sort of
vampire), and that she had determined to cherish and pamper Menippus,
that she might in the conclusion eat his flesh, and lap up his blood.
[132]

One of the miracles of Apollonius consisted in raising the dead. A
young woman of beautiful person was laid out upon a bier, and was in
the act of being conveyed to the tomb. She was followed by a multitude
of friends, weeping and lamenting, and among others by a young man,
to whom she had been on the point to be married. Apollonius met the
procession, and commanded those who bore it, to set down the bier. He
exhorted the proposed bridegroom to dry up his tears. He enquired the
name of the deceased, and, saluting her accordingly, took hold of her
hand, and murmured over her certain mystical words. At this act the
maiden raised herself on her seat, and presently returned home, whole
and sound, to the house of her father. [133]

Towards the end of his life Apollonius was accused before Domitian of
having conspired with Nerva to put an end to the reign of the tyrant.
He appears to have proved that he was at another place, and therefore
could not have engaged in the conspiracy that was charged upon him.
Domitian publicly cleared him from the accusation, but at the same
time required him not to withdraw from Rome, till the emperor had
first had a private conference with him. To this requisition Apollonius
replied in the most spirited terms. "I thank your majesty," said he,
"for the justice you have rendered me. But I cannot submit to what you
require. How can I be secure from the false accusations of the
unprincipled informers who infest your court? It is by their means
that whole towns of your empire are unpeopled, that provinces are
involved in mourning and tears, your armies are in mutiny, your senate
full of suspicion and alarms, and the islands are crowded with exiles.
It is not for myself that I speak, my soul is invulnerable to your
enmity; and it is not given to you by the Gods to become master of my
body." And, having thus given utterance to the virtuous anguish of his
spirit, he suddenly became invisible in the midst of a full assembly,
and was immediately after seen at Puteoli in the neighbourhood of
Mount Vesuvius. [134]

Domitian pursued the prophet no further; and he passed shortly after
to Greece, to Ionia, and finally to Ephesus. He every where delivered
lectures as he went, and was attended with crowds of the most
distinguished auditors, and with the utmost popularity. At length at
Ephesus, when he was in the midst of an eloquent harangue, he suddenly
became silent. He seemed as if he saw a spectacle which engrossed all
his attention. His countenance expressed fervour and the most
determined purpose. He exclaimed, "Strike the tyrant; strike him!" and
immediately after, raising himself, and addressing the assembly, he
said, "Domitian is no more; the world is delivered of its bitterest
oppressor."--The next post brought the news that the emperor was
killed at Rome, exactly on the day and at the hour when Apollonius had
thus made known the event at Ephesus. [135]

Nerva succeeded Domitian, between whom and Apollonius there subsisted
the sincerest friendship. The prophet however did not long survive
this event. He was already nearly one hundred years old. But what is
most extraordinary, no one could tell precisely when or where he died.
No tomb bore the record of his memory; and his biographer inclines to
the opinion that he was taken up into heaven. [136]

Divine honours were paid to this philosopher, both during his life,
and after his death. The inhabitants of Tyana built a temple to him,
and his image was to be found in many other temples. [137] The emperor
Adrian collected his letters, and treated them as an invaluable relic.
Alexander Severus placed his statue in his oratory, together with
those of Jesus Christ, Abraham and Orpheus, to whom he was accustomed
daily to perform the ceremonies of religion. [138] Vopiscus, in his
Life of Aurelian, [139] relates that this emperor had determined to
rase the city of Tyana, but that Apollonius, whom he knew from his
statues, appeared to him, and said, "Aurelian, if you would conquer,
do not think of the destruction of my citizens: Aurelian, if you would
reign, abstain from the blood of the innocent: Aurelian, if you would
conquer, distinguish yourself by acts of clemency." It was at the
desire of Julia, the mother of Severus, that Philostratus composed the
life of Apollonius, to which he is now principally indebted for his
fame. [140]

The publicity of Apollonius and his miracles has become considerably
greater, from the circumstance of the early enemies of the Christian
religion having instituted a comparison between the miracles of Christ
and of this celebrated philosopher, for the obvious purpose of
undermining one of the most considerable evidences of the truth of
divine revelation. It was probably with an indirect view of this sort
that Philostratus was incited by the empress Julia to compose his life
of this philosopher; and Hierocles, a writer of the time of Dioclesian,
appears to have penned an express treatise in the way of a parallel
between the two, attempting to shew a decisive superiority in the
miracles of Apollonius.


APULEIUS.

Apuleius of Madaura in Africa, who lived in the time of the Antonines,
appears to have been more remarkable as an author, than for any thing
that occurs in the history of his life. St. Augustine and Lactantius
however have coupled him with Apollonius of Tyana, as one of those who
for their pretended miracles were brought into competition with the
author of the Christian religion. But this seems to have arisen from
their misapprehension respecting his principal work, the Golden Ass,
which is a romance detailing certain wonderful transformations, and
which they appear to have thought was intended as an actual history of
the life of the author.

The work however deserves to be cited in this place, as giving a
curious representation of the ideas which were then prevalent on the
subjects of magic and witchcraft. The author in the course of his
narrative says: "When the day began to dawn, I chanced to awake, and
became desirous to know and see some marvellous and strange things,
remembering that I was now in the midst of Thessaly, where, by the
common report of the world, sorceries and enchantments are most
frequent. I viewed the situation of the place in which I was; nor was
there any thing I saw, that I believed to be the same thing which it
appeared. Insomuch that the very stones in the street I thought were
men bewitched and turned into that figure, and the birds I heard
chirping, the trees without the walls, and the running waters, were
changed from human creatures into the appearances they wore. I
persuaded myself that the statues and buildings could move, that the
oxen and other brute beasts could speak and tell strange tidings, and
that I should see and hear oracles from heaven, conveyed on the beams
of the sun."


ALEXANDER THE PAPHLAGONIAN.

At the same time with Apuleius lived Alexander the Paphlagonian, of
whom so extraordinary an account is transmitted to us by Lucian. He
was the native of an obscure town, called Abonotica, but was endowed
with all that ingenuity and cunning which enables men most effectually
to impose upon their fellow-creatures. He was tall of stature, of an
impressive aspect, a fair complexion, eyes that sparkled with an
awe-commanding fire as if informed by some divinity, and a voice to
the last degree powerful and melodious. To these he added the graces
of carriage and attire. Being born to none of the goods of fortune, he
considered with himself how to turn these advantages to the greatest
account; and the plan he fixed upon was that of instituting an oracle
entirely under his own direction. He began at Chalcedon on the
Thracian Bosphorus; but, continuing but a short time there, he used it
principally as an opportunity for publishing that Aesculapius, with
Apollo, his father, would in no long time fix his residence at
Abonotica. This rumour reached the fellow-citizens of the prophet, who
immediately began to lay the foundations of a temple for the reception
of the God. In due time Alexander made his appearance; and he so well
managed his scheme, that, by means of spies and emissaries whom he
scattered in all directions, he not only collected applications to his
prophetic skill from the different towns of Ionia, Cilicia and Galatia,
but presently extended his fame to Italy and Rome. For twenty years
scarcely any oracle of the known world could vie with that of
Abonotica; and the emperor Aurelius himself is said to have relied for
the success of a military expedition upon the predictions of Alexander
the Paphlagonian.

Lucian gives, or pretends to give, an account of the manner in which
Alexander gained so extraordinary a success. He says, that this young
man in his preliminary travels, coming to Pella in Macedon, found that
the environs of this city were distinguished from perhaps all other
parts of the world, by a breed of serpents of extraordinary size and
beauty. Our author adds that these serpents were so tame, that they
inhabited the houses of the province, and slept in bed with the
children. If you trod upon them, they did not turn again, or shew
tokens of anger, and they sucked the breasts of the women to whom it
might be of service to draw off their milk. Lucian says, it was
probably one of these serpents, that was found in the bed of Olympias,
and gave occasion to the tale that Alexander the Great was begotten by
Jupiter under the form of a serpent. The prophet bought the largest
and finest serpent he could find, and conveyed it secretly with him
into Asia. When he came to Abonotica, he found the temple that was
built surrounded with a moat; and he took an opportunity privately of
sinking a goose-egg, which he had first emptied of its contents,
inserting instead a young serpent just hatched, and closing it again
with great care. He then told his fellow-citizens that the God was
arrived, and hastening to the moat, scooped up the egg in an egg-cup
in presence of the whole assembly. He next broke the shell, and shewed
the young serpent that twisted about his fingers in presence of the
admiring multitude. After this he suffered several days to elapse, and
then, collecting crowds from every part of Paphlagonia, he exhibited
himself, as he had previously announced he should do, with the fine
serpent he had brought from Macedon twisted in coils about the
prophet's neck, and its head hid under his arm-pit, while a head
artfully formed with linen, and bearing some resemblance to a human
face, protruded itself, and passed for the head of the reptile. The
spectators were beyond measure astonished to see a little embryo
serpent, grown in a few days to so magnificent a size, and exhibiting
the features of a human countenance.

Having thus far succeeded, Alexander did not stop here. He contrived
a pipe which passed seemingly into the mouth of the animal, while the
other end terminated in an adjoining room, where a man was placed
unseen, and delivered the replies which appeared to come from the
mouth of the serpent. This immediate communication with the God was
reserved for a few favoured suitors, who bought at a high price the
envied distinction.

The method with ordinary enquirers was for them to communicate their
requests in writing, which they were enjoined to roll up and carefully
seal; and these scrolls were returned to them in a few days, with the
seals apparently unbroken, but with an answer written within,
strikingly appropriate to the demand that was preferred.--It is further
to be observed, that the mouth of the serpent was occasionally opened
by means of a horsehair skilfully adjusted for the purpose, at the
same time that by similar means the animal darted out its biforked
tongue to the terror of the amazed bystanders.




REVOLUTION PRODUCED IN THE HISTORY OF NECROMANCY AND WITCHCRAFT UPON
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF CHRISTIANITY.


It is necessary here to take notice of the great revolution that took
place under Constantine, nearly three hundred years after the death of
Christ, when Christianity became the established religion of the Roman
empire. This was a period which produced a new era in the history of
necromancy and witchcraft. Under the reign of polytheism, devotion was
wholly unrestrained in every direction it might chance to assume. Gods
known and unknown, the spirits of departed heroes, the Gods of heaven
and hell, abstractions of virtue or vice, might unblamed be made the
objects of religious worship. Witchcraft therefore, and the invocation
of the spirits of the dead, might be practised with toleration; or at
all events were not regarded otherwise than as venial deviations from
the religion of the state.

It is true, there must always have been a horror of secret arts,
especially of such as were of a maleficent nature. At all times men
dreaded the mysterious power of spells and incantations, of potent
herbs and nameless rites, which were able to control the eternal order
of the planets, and the voluntary operations of mind, which could
extinguish or recal life, inflame the passions of the soul, blast the
works of creation, and extort from invisible beings and the dead the
secrets of futurity. But under the creed of the unity of the divine
nature the case was exceedingly different. Idolatry, and the worship
of other Gods than one, were held to be crimes worthy of the utmost
abhorrence and the severest punishment. There was no medium between
the worship of heaven and hell. All adoration was to be directed to
God the Creator through the mediation of his only begotten Son; or, if
prayers were addressed to inferior beings, and the glorified spirits
of his saints, at least they terminated in the Most High, were a
deprecation of his wrath, a soliciting his favour, and a homage to his
omnipotence. On the other hand sorcery and witchcraft were sins of the
blackest dye. In opposition to the one only God, the creator of heaven
and earth, was the "prince of darkness," the "prince of the power of
the air," who contended perpetually against the Almighty, and sought
to seduce his creatures and his subjects from their due allegiance.
Sorcerers and witches were supposed to do homage and sell themselves
to the devil, than which it was not in the mind of man to conceive a
greater enormity, or a crime more worthy to cause its perpetrators to
be exterminated from the face of the earth. The thought of it was of
power to cause the flesh of man to creep and tingle with horror: and
such as were prone to indulge their imaginations to the utmost extent
of the terrible, found a perverse delight in conceiving this
depravity, and were but too much disposed to fasten it upon their
fellow-creatures.


MAGICAL CONSULTATIONS RESPECTING THE LIFE OF THE EMPEROR.

It was not within the range of possibility, that such a change should
take place in the established religion of the empire as that from
Paganism to Christianity, without convulsions and vehement struggle.
The prejudices of mankind on a subject so nearly concerned with their
dearest interests and affections must inevitably be powerful and
obstinate; and the lucre of the priesthood, together with the strong
hold they must necessarily have had on the weakness and superstition
of their flocks, would tend to give force and perpetuity to the
contention. Julian, a man of great ability and unquestionable
patriotism, succeeded to the empire only twenty-four years after the
death of Constantine; and he employed the most vigorous measures for
the restoration of the ancient religion. But the reign of Julian was
scarcely more than eighteen months in duration: and that of Jovian,
his successor, who again unfurled the standard of Christianity, lasted
hardly more than half a year. The state of things bore a striking
similarity to that of England at the time of the Protestant
Reformation, where the opposite faiths of Edward the Sixth and his
sister Mary, and the shortness of their reigns, gave preternatural
keenness to the feelings of the parties, and instigated them to hang
with the most restless anticipation upon the chances of the demise of
the sovereign, and the consequences, favourable or unfavourable, that
might arise from a new accession.

The joint reign of Valentinian and Valens, Christian emperors, had now
lasted several years, when information was conveyed to these princes,
and particularly to the latter, who had the rule of Asia, that
numerous private consultations were held, as to the duration of their
authority, and the person of the individual who should come after them.
The succession of the Roman empire was elective; and consequently
there was almost an unlimited scope for conjecture in this question.
Among the various modes of enquiry that were employed we are told,
that the twenty-four letters of the alphabet were artificially
disposed in a circle, and that a magic ring, being suspended over the
centre, was conceived to point to the initial letters of the name of
him who should be the future emperor. Theodorus, a man of most eminent
qualifications, and high popularity, was put to death by the jealousy
of Valens, on the vague evidence that this kind of trial had indicated
the early letters of his name. [141] It may easily be imagined, that,
where so restless and secret an investigation was employed as to the
successor that fate might provide, conspiracy would not always be
absent. Charges of this sort were perpetually multiplied; informers
were eager to obtain favour or rewards by the disclosures they
pretended to communicate; and the Christians, who swayed the sceptre
of the state, did not fail to aggravate the guilt of those who had
recourse to these means for satisfying their curiosity, by alleging
that demons were called up from hell to aid in the magic solution. The
historians of these times no doubt greatly exaggerate the terror and
the danger, when they say, that the persons apprehended on such
charges in the great cities outnumbered the peaceable citizens who
were left unsuspected, and that the military who had charge of the
prisoners, complained that they were wholly without the power to
restrain the flight of the captives, or to control the multitude of
partisans who insisted on their immediate release. [142] The
punishments were barbarous and indiscriminate; to be accused was
almost the same thing as to be convicted; and those were obliged to
hold themselves fortunate, who escaped with a fine that in a manner
swallowed up their estates.




HISTORY OF NECROMANCY IN THE EAST.


From the countries best known in what is usually styled ancient
history, in other words from Greece and Rome, and the regions into
which the spirit of conquest led the people of Rome and Greece, it is
time we should turn to the East, and those remoter divisions of the
world, which to them were comparatively unknown.

With what has been called the religion of the Magi, of Egypt, Persia
and Chaldea, they were indeed superficially acquainted; but for a more
familiar and accurate knowledge of the East we are chiefly indebted to
certain events of modern history; to the conquests of the Saracens,
when they possessed themselves of the North of Africa, made themselves
masters of Spain, and threatened in their victorious career to subject
France to their standard; to the crusades; to the spirit of nautical
discovery which broke out in the close of the fifteenth century; and
more recently to the extensive conquests and mighty augmentation of
territory which have been realised by the English East India Company.

The religion of Persia was that of Zoroaster and the Magi. When
Ardshir, or Artaxerxes, the founder of the race of the Sassanides,
restored the throne of Persia in the year of Christ 226, he called
together an assembly of the Magi from all parts of his dominions, and
they are said to have met to the number of eighty thousand. [143]
These priests, from a remote antiquity, had to a great degree
preserved their popularity, and had remarkably adhered to their
ancient institutions.

They seem at all times to have laid claim to the power of suspending
the course of nature, and producing miraculous phenomena. But in so
numerous a body there must have been some whose pretensions were of a
more moderate nature, and others who displayed a loftier aspiration.
The more ambitious we find designated in their native language by the
name of _Jogees_, [144] of the same signification as the Latin
_juncti_.

Their notions of the Supreme Being are said to have been of the
highest and abstrusest character, as comprehending every possible
perfection of power, wisdom and goodness, as purely spiritual in his
essence, and incapable of the smallest variation and change, the same
yesterday, to-day, and for ever. Such as they apprehended him to be,
such the most perfect of their priests aspired to make themselves.
They were to put off all human weakness and frailty; and, in
proportion as they _assimilated_, or rather _became one_
with the Deity, they supposed themselves to partake of his attributes,
to become infinitely wise and powerful and good. Hence their claim to
suspend the course of nature, and to produce miraculous phenomena. For
this purpose it was necessary that they should abstract themselves
from every thing mortal, have no human passions or partialities, and
divest themselves as much as possible of all the wants and demands of
our material frame. Zoroaster appears indeed to have preferred
morality to devotion, to have condemned celibacy and fasting, and to
have pronounced, that "he who sows the ground with diligence and care,
acquires a greater stock of religious merit than he who should repeat
ten thousand prayers." But his followers at least did not abide by
this decision. They found it more practicable to secure to themselves
an elevated reputation by severe observances, rigid self-denial, and
the practice of the most inconceivable mortifications. This excited
wonder and reverence and a sort of worship from the bystander, which
industry and benevolence do not so assuredly secure. They therefore in
frequent instances lacerated their flesh, and submitted to incredible
hardships. They scourged themselves without mercy, wounded their
bodies with lancets and nails, [145] and condemned themselves to
remain for days and years unmoved in the most painful attitudes. It
was no unprecedented thing for them to take their station upon the top
of a high pillar; and some are said to have continued in this position,
without ever coming down from it, for thirty years. The more they
trampled under foot the universal instincts of our nature, and shewed
themselves superior to its infirmities, the nearer they approached to
the divine essence, and to the becoming one with the Omnipresent. They
were of consequence the more sinless and perfect; their will became
the will of the Deity, and they were in a sense invested with, and
became the mediums of the acts of, his power. The result of all this
is, that they who exercised the art of magic in its genuine and
unadulterated form, at all times applied it to purposes of goodness
and benevolence, and that their interference was uniformly the signal
of some unequivocal benefit, either to mankind in general, or to those
individuals of mankind who were best entitled to their aid. It was
theirs to succour virtue in distress, and to interpose the divine
assistance in cases that most loudly and unquestionably called for it.

Such, we are told, was the character of the pure and primitive magic,
as it was handed down from the founder of their religion. It was
called into action by the Jogees, men who, by an extraordinary merit
of whatever sort, had in a certain sense rendered themselves one with
the Deity. But the exercise of magical power was too tempting an
endowment, not in some cases to be liable to abuse. Even as we read of
the angels in heaven, that not all of them stood, and persevered in
their original sinlessness and integrity, so of the Jogees some,
partaking of the divine power, were also under the direction of a will
celestial and divine, while others, having derived, we must suppose, a
mighty and miraculous power from the gift of God, afterwards abused it
by applying it to capricious, or, as it should seem, to malignant
purposes. This appears to have been every where essential to the
history of magic. If those who were supposed to possess it in its
widest extent and most astonishing degree, had uniformly employed it
only in behalf of justice and virtue, they would indeed have been
regarded as benefactors, and been entitled to the reverence and love
of mankind. But the human mind is always prone to delight in the
terrible. No sooner did men entertain the idea of what was supernatural
and uncontrolable, than they began to fear it and to deprecate its
hostility. They apprehended they knew not what, of the dead returning
to life, of invisible beings armed with the power and intention of
executing mischief, and of human creatures endowed with the prerogative
of bringing down pestilence and slaughter, of dispensing wealth and
poverty, prosperity and calamity at their pleasure, of causing health
and life to waste away by insensible, but sure degrees, of producing
lingering torments, and death in its most fearful form. Accordingly it
appears that, as there were certain magicians who were as Gods
dispensing benefits to those who best deserved it, so there were
others, whose only principle of action was caprice, and against whose
malice no innocence and no degree of virtue would prove a defence. As
the former sort of magicians were styled _Jogees_, and were held
to be the deputies and instruments of infinite goodness, so the other
sort were named _Ku-Jogees_, that is, persons who possessing the
same species of ascendancy over the powers of nature, employed it only
in deeds of malice and wickedness.

In the mean time these magicians appear to have produced the wonderful
effects which drew to them the reverence of the vulgar, very frequently
by the intervention of certain beings of a nature superior to the
human, who should seem, though ordinarily invisible, to have had the
faculty of rendering themselves visible when they thought proper, and
assuming what shape they pleased. These are principally known by the
names of Peris, Dives, [146] and Gins, or Genii. Richardson, in the
preface to his Persian Dictionary, from which our account will
principally be taken, refers us to what he calls a romance, but from
which he, appears to derive the outline of his Persian mythology. In
this romance Kahraman, a mortal, is introduced in conversation with
Simurgh, a creature partaking of the nature of a bird and a griffon,
who reveals to him the secrets of the past history of the earth. She
tells him that she has lived to see the world seven times peopled with
inhabitants of so many different natures, and seven times depopulated,
the former inhabitants having been so often removed, and giving place
to their successors. The beings who occupied the earth previously to
man, were distinguished into the Peris and the Dives; and, when they
no longer possessed the earth in chief, they were, as it should seem,
still permitted, in an airy and unsubstantial form, and for the most
part invisibly, to interfere in the affairs of the human race. These
beings ruled the earth during seventy-two generations. The last
monarch, named Jan bin Jan, conducted himself so ill, that God sent
the angel Haris to chastise him. Haris however became intoxicated with
power, and employed his prerogative in the most reprehensible manner.
God therefore at length created Adam, the first of men, crowning him
with glory and honour, and giving him dominion over all other earthly
beings. He commanded the angels to obey him; but Haris refused, and
the Dives followed his example. The rebels were for the most part sent
to hell for their contumacy; but a part of the Dives, whose
disobedience had been less flagrant, were reserved, and allowed for a
certain term to walk the earth, and by their temptations to put the
virtue and constancy of man to trial. Henceforth the human race was
secretly surrounded by invisible beings of two species, the Peris, who
were friendly to man, and the Dives, who exercised their ingenuity in
involving them in error and guilt. The Peris were beautiful and
benevolent, but imperfect and offending beings; they are supposed to
have borne a considerable resemblance to the Fairies of the western
world. The Dives were hideous in form, and of a malignant disposition.
The Peris subsist wholly on perfumes, which the Dives, being of a
grosser nature, hold in abhorrence. This mythology is said to have
been unknown in Arabia till long after Mahomet: the only invisible
beings we read of in their early traditions are the Gins, which term,
though now used for the most part as synonimous with Dives, originally
signified nothing more than certain infernal fiends of stupendous
power, whose agency was hostile to man.

There was perpetual war between the Peris and the Dives, whose proper
habitation was Kaf, or Caucasus, a line of mountains which was
supposed to reach round the globe. In these wars the Peris generally
came off with the worst; and in that case they are represented in the
traditional tales of the East, as applying to some gallant and heroic
mortal to reinforce their exertions. The warriors who figure in these
narratives appear all to have been ancient Persian kings. Tahmuras,
one of the most celebrated of them, is spoken of as mounting upon
Simurgh, surrounded with talismans and enchanted armour, and furnished
with a sword the dint of which nothing could resist. He proceeds to
Kaf, or Ginnistan, and defeats Arzshank, the chief of the Dives, but
is defeated in turn by a more formidable competitor. The war appears
to be carried on for successive ages with alternate advantage and
disadvantage, till after the lapse of centuries Rustan kills Arzshank,
and finally reduces the Dives to a subject and tributary condition.
In all this there is a great resemblance to the fables of Scandinavia;
and the Northern and the Eastern world seem emulously to have
contributed their quota of chivalry and romance, of heroic achievements
and miraculous events, of monsters and dragons, of amulets and
enchantment, and all those incidents which most rouse the imagination,
and are calculated to instil into generous and enterprising youth a
courage the most undaunted and invincible.


GENERAL SILENCE OF THE EAST RESPECTING INDIVIDUAL NECROMANCERS.

Asia has been more notorious than perhaps any other division of the
globe for the vast multiplicity and variety of its narratives of
sorcery and magic. I have however been much disappointed in the thing
I looked for in the first place, and that is, in the individual
adventures of such persons as might be supposed to have gained a high
degree of credit and reputation for their skill in exploits of magic.
Where the professors are many (and they have been perhaps no where so
numerous as those of magic in the East), it is unavoidable but that
some should have been more dextrous than others, more eminently gifted
by nature, more enthusiastic and persevering in the prosecution of
their purpose, and more fortunate in awakening popularity and
admiration among their contemporaries. In the instances of Apollonius
Tyanaeus and others among the ancients, and of Cornelius Agrippa, Roger
Bacon and Faust among the moderns, we are acquainted with many
biographical particulars of their lives, and can trace with some
degree of accuracy, their peculiarities of disposition, and observe
how they were led gradually from one study and one mode of action to
another. But the magicians of the East, so to speak, are mere
abstractions, not characterised by any of those habits which
distinguish one individual of the human race from another, and having
those marking traits and petty lineaments which make the person, as it
were, start up into life while he passes before our eyes. They are
merely reported to us as men prone to the producing great signs and
wonders, and nothing more.

Two of the most remarkable exceptions that I have found to this rule,
occur in the examples of Rocail, and of Hakem, otherwise called
Mocanna.


ROCAIL.

The first of these however is scarcely to be called an exception, as
lying beyond the limits of all credible history, Rocail is said to
have been the younger brother of Seth, the son of Adam. A Dive, or
giant of mount Caucasus, being hard pressed by his enemies, sought as
usual among the sons of men for aid that might extricate him out of
his difficulties. He at length made an alliance with Rocail, by whose
assistance he arrived at the tranquillity he desired, and who in
consequence became his grand vizier, or prime minister. He governed
the dominions of his principal for many years with great honour and
success; but, ultimately perceiving the approaches of old age and
death, he conceived a desire to leave behind him a monument worthy of
his achievements in policy and war. He according erected, we are not
told by what means, a magnificent palace, and a sepulchre equally
worthy of admiration. But what was most entitled to notice, he peopled
this palace with statues of so extraordinary a quality, that they
moved and performed all the functions and offices of living men, so
that every one who beheld them would have believed that they were
actually informed with souls, whereas in reality all they did was by
the power of magic, in consequence of which, though they were in fact
no more than inanimate matter, they were enabled to obey the behests,
and perform the will, of the persons by whom they were visited. [147]


HAKEM, OTHERWISE MOCANNA.

Hakem was a leader in one of the different divisions of the followers
of Mahomet. To inspire the greater awe into the minds of his
supporters, he pretended that he was the Most High God, the creator of
heaven and earth, under one of the different forms by which he has in
successive ages become incarnate, and made himself manifest to his
creatures. He distinguished himself by the peculiarity of always
wearing a thick and impervious veil, by which, according to his
followers, he covered the dazzling splendour of his countenance, which
was so great that no mortal could behold it and live, but that,
according to his enemies, only served to conceal the hideousness of
his features, too monstrously deformed to be contemplated without
horror. One of his miracles, which seems the most to have been
insisted on, was that he nightly, for a considerable space of time,
caused an orb, something like the moon, to rise from a sacred well,
which gave a light scarcely less splendid than the day, that diffused
its beams for many miles around. His followers were enthusiastically
devoted to his service, and he supported his authority unquestioned
for a number of years. At length a more formidable opponent appeared,
and after several battles he became obliged to shut himself up in a
strong fortress. Here however he was so straitly besieged as to be
driven to the last despair, and, having administered poison to his
whole garrison, he prepared a bath of the most powerful ingredients,
which, when he threw himself into it, dissolved his frame, even to the
very bones, so that nothing remained of him but a lock of his hair. He
acted thus, with the hope that it would be believed that he was
miraculously taken up into heaven; nor did this fail to be the effect
on the great body of his adherents. [148]


ARABIAN NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENTS.

The most copious record of stories of Asiatic enchantment that we
possess, is contained in the Arabian Nights' Entertainments; to which
we may add the Persian Tales, and a few other repositories of Oriental
adventures. It is true that these are delivered to us in a garb of
fiction; but they are known to present so exact a picture of Eastern
manners and customs, and so just a delineation of the follies, the
weaknesses and credulity of the races of men that figure in them, that,
in the absence of materials of a strictly historical sort of which we
have to complain, they may not inadequately supply the place, and may
furnish us with a pretty full representation of the ideas of sorcery
and magic which for centuries were entertained in this part of the
world. They have indeed one obvious defect, which it is proper the
reader should keep constantly in mind. The mythology and groundwork of
the whole is Persian: but the narrator is for the most part a
Mahometan. Of consequence the ancient Fire-worshippers, though they
contribute the entire materials, and are therefore solely entitled to
our gratitude and deference for the abundant supply they have furnished
to our curiosity, are uniformly treated in these books with disdain
and contumely as unworthy of toleration, while the comparative upstart
race of the believers in the Koran are held out to us as the only
enlightened and upright among the sons of men.

Many of the matters most currently related among these supernatural
phenomena, are tales of transformation. A lady has two sisters of the
most profligate and unprincipled character. They have originally the
same share of the paternal inheritance as herself. But they waste it
in profusion and folly, while she improves her portion by good
judgment and frugality. Driven to the extremity of distress, they
humble themselves, and apply to her for assistance. She generously
imparts to them the same amount of wealth that they originally
possessed, and they are once more reduced to poverty. This happens
again and again. At length, finding them incapable of discretion, she
prevails on them to come and live with her. By wearisome and ceaseless
importunity they induce her to embark in a mercantile enterprise. Here
she meets with a prince, who had the misfortune to be born in a region
of fire-worshippers, but was providentially educated by a Mahometan
nurse. Hence, when his countrymen were by divine vengeance all turned
into stones, he alone was saved alive. The lady finds him in this
situation, endowed with sense and motion amidst a petrified city, and
they immediately fall in love with each other. She brings him away
from this melancholy scene, and together they go on board the vessel
which had been freighted by herself and her sisters. But the sisters
become envious of her good fortune, and conspire, while she and the
prince are asleep, to throw them overboard. The prince is drowned; but
the lady with great difficulty escapes. She finds herself in a desert
island, not far from the place where she had originally embarked on
her adventure; and, having slept off the fatigues she had encountered,
beholds on her awaking a black woman with an agreeable countenance, a
fairy, who leads in her hand two black bitches coupled together with a
cord. These black bitches are the lady's sisters, thus metamorphosed,
as a punishment for their ingratitude and cruelty. The fairy conveys
her through the air to her own house in Bagdad, which she finds well
stored with all sorts of commodities, and delivers to her the two
animals, with an injunction that she is to whip them every day at a
certain hour as a further retribution for their crimes. This was
accordingly punctually performed; and, at the end of each day's
penance, the lady, having before paid no regard to the animals'
gestures and pitiable cries, wept over them, took them in her arms,
kissed them, and carefully wiped the moisture from their eyes. Having
persevered for a length of time in this discipline, the offenders are
finally, by a counter-incantation, restored to their original forms,
being by the severities they had suffered entirely cured of the vices
which had occasioned their calamitous condition.

Another story is of a calender, a sort of Mahometan monk, with one eye,
who had originally been a prince. He had contracted a taste for
navigation and naval discoveries; and, in one of his voyages, having
been driven by stress of weather into unknown seas, he suddenly finds
himself attracted towards a vast mountain of loadstone, which first,
by virtue of the iron and nails in the ship, draws the vessel towards
itself, and then, by its own intrinsic force, extracts the nails, so
that the ship tumbles to pieces, and every one on board is drowned.
The mountain, on the side towards the sea, is all covered with nails,
which had been drawn from vessels that previously suffered the same
calamity; and these nails at once preserve and augment the fatal power
of the mountain. The prince only escapes; and he finds himself in a
desolate island, with a dome of brass, supported by brazen pillars,
and on the top of it a horse of brass, and a rider of the same metal.
This rider the prince is fated to throw down, by means of an enchanted
arrow, and thus to dissolve the charm which had been fatal to
thousands. From the desolate island he embarked on board a boat, with
a single rower, a man of metal, and would have been safely conveyed to
his native country, had he not inadvertently pronounced the name of
God, that he had been warned not to do, and which injunction he had
observed many days. On this the boat immediately sunk; but the prince
was preserved, who comes into a desolate island, where he finds but
one inhabitant, a youth of fifteen. This youth is hid in a cavern, it
having been predicted of him that he should be killed after fifty days,
by the man that threw down the horse of brass and his rider. A great
friendship is struck up between the unsuspecting youth and the prince,
who nevertheless fulfils the prediction, having by a pure accident
killed the youth on the fiftieth day. He next arrives at a province of
the main land, where he visits a castle, inhabited by ten very
agreeable young men, each blind of the right eye. He dwells with them
for a month, and finds, after a day of pleasant entertainment, that
each evening they do penance in squalidness and ashes. His curiosity
is greatly excited to obtain an explanation of what he saw, but this
they refuse, telling him at the same time, that he may, if he pleases,
pass through the same adventure as they have done, and, if he does,
wishing it may be attended with a more favourable issue. He determines
to make the experiment; and by their direction, after certain
preparations, is flown away with through the air by a roc, a stupendous
bird, that is capable in the same manner of carrying off an elephant.
By this means he is brought to a castle of the most extraordinary
magnificence, inhabited by forty ladies of exquisite beauty. With
these ladies he lives for eleven months in a perpetual succession of
delights. But in the twelfth month they tell him, that they are
obliged to leave him till the commencement of the new year. In the
mean time they give him for his amusement the keys of one hundred
apartments, all but one of which he is permitted to open. He is
delighted with the wonders of these apartments till the last day. On
that day he opens the forbidden room, where the rarity that most
strikes him is a black horse of admirable shape and appearance, with
a saddle and bridle of gold. He leads this horse into the open air,
and is tempted to mount him. The horse first stands still; but at
length, being touched with a switch, spreads a pair of wings which the
prince had not before perceived, and mounts to an amazing height in
the air. The horse finally descends on the terrace of a castle, where
he throws his rider, and leaves him, having first dashed out his right
eye with a sudden swing of his tail. The prince goes down into the
castle, and to his surprise finds himself in company with the ten
young men, blind of one eye, who had passed through the same adventure
as he had done, and all been betrayed by means of the same infirmity.


PERSIAN TALES.

These two stories are from the Arabian Nights: the two following are
from the Persian Tales.--Fadlallah, king of Mousel, contracted an
intimacy with a young dervise, a species of Turkish friar, who makes a
vow of perpetual poverty. The dervise, to ingratiate himself the more
with the prince, informed him of a secret he possessed, by means of a
certain incantation, of projecting his soul into the body of any dead
animal he thought proper.

To convince the king that this power was no empty boast, he offered to
quit his own body, and animate that of a doe, which Fadlallah had just
killed in hunting. He accordingly executed what he proposed, took
possession of the body of the doe, displayed the most surprising
agility, approached the king, fawning on him with every expression of
endearment, and then, after various bounds, deserting the limbs of the
animal, and repossessing his own frame, which during the experiment
had lain breathless on the ground. Fadlallah became earnest to possess
the secret of the dervise; and, after some demurs, it was communicated
to him. The king took possession of the body of the doe; but his
treacherous confident no sooner saw the limbs of Fadlallah stretched
senseless on the ground, than he conveyed his own spirit into them,
and, bending his bow, sought to destroy the life of his defenceless
victim. The king by his agility escaped; and the dervise, resorting to
the palace, took possession of the throne, and of the bed of the queen,
Zemroude, with whom Fadlallah was desperately enamoured. The first
precaution of the usurper was to issue a decree that all the deer
within his dominions should be killed, hoping by this means to destroy
the rightful sovereign. But the king, aware of his danger, had deserted
the body of the doe, and entered that of a dead nightingale that lay
in his path. In this disguise he hastened to the palace, and placed
himself in a wide-spreading tree, which grew immediately before the
apartment of Zemroude. Here he poured out his complaints and the grief
that penetrated his soul in such melodious notes, as did not fail to
attract the attention of the queen. She sent out her bird-catchers to
make captive the little warbler; and Fadlallah, who desired no better,
easily suffered himself to be made their prisoner. In this new
position he demonstrated by every gesture of fondness his partiality
to the queen; but if any of her women approached him, he pecked at
them in anger, and, when the impostor made his appearance, could not
contain the vehemence of his rage. It happened one night that the
queen's lap-dog died; and the thought struck Fadlallah that he would
animate the corpse of this animal. The next morning Zemroude found her
favourite bird dead in his cage, and immediately became inconsolable.
Never, she said, was so amiable a bird; he distinguished her from all
others; he seemed even to entertain a passion for her; and she felt as
if she could not survive his loss. The dervise in vain tried every
expedient to console her. At length he said, that, if she pleased, he
would cause her nightingale to revive every morning, and entertain her
with his tunes as long as she thought proper. The dervise accordingly
laid himself on a sopha, and by means of certain cabalistic words,
transported his soul into the body of the nightingale, and began to
sing. Fadlallah watched his time; he lay in a corner of the room
unobserved; but no sooner had the dervise deserted his body, than the
king proceeded to take possession of it. The first thing he did was to
hasten to the cage, to open the door with uncontrolable impatience,
and, seizing the bird, to twist off its head. Zemroude, amazed, asked
him what he meant by so inhuman an action. Fadlallah in reply related
to her all the circumstances that had befallen him; and the queen
became so struck with agony and remorse that she had suffered her
person, however innocently, to be polluted by so vile an impostor,
that she could not get over the recollection, but pined away and died
from a sense of the degradation she had endured.

But a much more perplexing and astounding instance of transformation
occurs in the history of the Young King of Thibet and the Princess of
the Naimans. The sorcerers in this case are represented as, without
any intermediate circumstance to facilitate their witchcraft, having
the ability to assume the form of any one they please, and in
consequence to take the shape of one actually present, producing a
duplication the most confounding that can be imagined.--Mocbel, the
son of an artificer of Damascus, but whose father had bequeathed him
considerable wealth, contrived to waste his patrimony and his youth
together in profligate living with Dilnouaze, a woman of dissolute
manners. Finding themselves at once poor and despised, they had
recourse to the sage Bedra, the most accomplished magician of the
desert, and found means to obtain her favour. In consequence she
presented them with two rings, which had the power of enabling them to
assume the likeness of any man or woman they please. Thus equipped,
Mocbel heard of the death of Mouaffack, prince of the Naimans, who was
supposed to have been slain in a battle, and whose body had never been
found. The niece of Mouaffack now filled the throne; and under these
circumstances Mocbel conceived the design of personating the absent
Mouaffack, exciting a rebellion among his countrymen, and taking
possession of the throne. In this project he succeeded; and the
princess driven into exile, took refuge in the capital of Thibet. Here
the king saw her, fell in love with her, and espoused her. Being made
acquainted with her history, he resolved to re-conquer her dominions,
and sent a defiance to the usurper. Mocbel, terrified at the thought
of so formidable an invader, first pretended to die, and then, with
Dilnouaze, who during his brief reign had under the form of a beautiful
woman personated his queen, proceeded in his original form to the
capital of Thibet. Here his purpose was to interrupt the happiness of
those who had disturbed him in his deceitful career. Accordingly one
night, when the queen, previously to proceeding to her repose, had
shut herself up in her closet to read certain passages of the Alcoran,
Dilnouaze, assuming her form with the minutest exactness, hastened to
place herself in the royal bed by the side of the king. After a time,
the queen shut her book, and went along the gallery to the king's
bedchamber, Mocbel watched his time, and placed himself, under the
form of a frightful apparition, directly in the queen's path. She
started at the sight, and uttered a piercing shriek. The king
recognised her voice, and hastened to see what had happened to her.
She explained; but the king spoke of something much more extraordinary,
and asked her how it could possibly happen that she should be in the
gallery, at the same moment that he had left her, undressed and in bed.
They proceeded to the chamber to unravel the mystery. Here a contention
occurred between the real and the seeming queen, each charging the
other with imposture. The king turned from one to the other, and was
unable to decide between their pretensions. The courtiers and the
ladies of the bedchamber were called, and all were perplexed with
uncertainty and doubt. At length they determine in favour of the false
queen, It was then proposed that the other should be burned for a
sorceress. The king however forbade this. He was not yet altogether
decided; and could not resolve to consign his true queen, as it might
possibly be, to a cruel death. He was therefore content to strip her
of her royal robes, to clothe her in rags, and thrust her ignominiously
from his palace.

Treachery however was not destined to be ultimately triumphant. The
king one day rode out a hunting; and Mocbel, that he might the better
deceive the guards of the palace, seizing the opportunity, assumed his
figure, and went to bed to Dilnouaze. The king meanwhile recollected
something of importance, that he had forgotten before he went out to
hunt, and returning upon his steps, proceeded to the royal chamber.
Here to his utter confusion he found a man in bed with his queen, and
that man to his greater astonishment the exact counterpart of himself.
Furious at the sight, he immediately drew his scymetar. The man
contrived to escape down the backstairs. The woman however remained in
bed; and, stretching out her hands to intreat for mercy, the king
struck off the hand which had the ring on it, and she immediately
appeared, as she really was, a frightful hag. She begged for life; and,
that she might mollify his rage, explained the mystery, told him that
it was by means of a ring that she effected the delusion, and that by
a similar enchantment her paramour had assumed the likeness of the
king. The king meanwhile was inexorable, and struck off her head. He
next turned in pursuit of the adulterer. Mocbel however had had time
to mount on horseback. But the king mounted also; and, being the
better horseman, in a short time overtook his foe. The impostor did
not dare to cope with him, but asked his life; and the king,
considering him as the least offender of the two, pardoned him upon
condition of his surrendering the ring, in consequence of which he
passed the remainder of his life in poverty and decrepitude.


STORY OF A GOULE.

A story in the Arabian Nights, which merits notice for its singularity,
and as exhibiting a particular example of the credulity of the people
of the East, is that of a man who married a sorceress, without being
in any way conscious of her character in that respect. She was
sufficiently agreeable in her person, and he found for the most part
no reason to be dissatisfied with her. But he became uneasy at the
strangeness of her behaviour, whenever they sat together at meals. The
husband provided a sufficient variety of dishes, and was anxious that
his wife should eat and be refreshed. But she took scarcely any
nourishment. He set before her a plate of rice. From this plate she
took somewhat, grain by grain; but she would taste of no other dish.
The husband remonstrated with her upon her way of eating, but to no
purpose; she still went on the same. He knew it was impossible for any
one to subsist upon so little as she ate; and his curiosity was roused.
One night, as he lay quietly awake, he perceived his wife rise very
softly, and put on her clothes. He watched, but made as if he saw
nothing. Presently she opened the door, and went out. He followed her
unperceived, by moonlight, and tracked her into a place of graves.
Here to his astonishment he saw her joined by a Goule, a sort of
wandering demon, which is known to infest ruinous buildings, and from
time to time suddenly rushes out, seizes children and other defenceless
people, strangles, and devours them. Occasionally, for want of other
food, this detested race will resort to churchyards, and, digging up
the bodies of the newly-buried, gorge their appetites upon the flesh
of these. The husband followed his wife and her supernatural companion,
and watched their proceedings. He saw them digging in a new-made grave.
They extracted the body of the deceased; and, the Goule cutting it up
joint by joint, they feasted voraciously, and, having satisfied their
appetites, cast the remainder into the grave again, and covered it up
as before. The husband now withdrew unobserved to his bed, and the
wife followed presently after. He however conceived a horrible
loathing of such a wife; and she discovers that he is acquainted with
her dreadful secret. They can no longer live together; and a
metamorphosis followed. She turned him into a dog, which by ill usage
she drove from her door; and he, aided by a benevolent sorceress,
first recovers his natural shape, and then, having changed her into a
mare, by perpetual hard usage and ill treatment vents his detestation
of the character he had discovered in her.


ARABIAN NIGHTS.

A compilation of more vigorous imagination and more exhaustless
variety than the Arabian Nights, perhaps never existed. Almost every
thing that can be conceived of marvellous and terrific is there to be
found. When we should apprehend the author or authors to have come to
an end of the rich vein in which they expatiate, still new wonders are
presented to us in endless succession. Their power of comic exhibition
is not less extraordinary than their power of surprising and
terrifying. The splendour of their painting is endless; and the mind
of the reader is roused and refreshed by shapes and colours for ever
new.


RESEMBLANCE OF THE TALES OF THE EAST AND OF EUROPE.

It is characteristic of this work to exhibit a faithful and particular
picture of Eastern manners, customs, and modes of thinking and acting.
And yet, now and then, it is curious to observe the coincidence of
Oriental imagination with that of antiquity and of the North of Europe,
so that it is difficult to conceive the one not to be copied from the
other. Perhaps it was so; and perhaps not. Man is every where man,
possessed of the same faculties, stimulated by the same passions,
deriving pain and pleasure from the same sources, with similar hopes
and fears, aspirations and alarms.

In the Third Voyage of Sinbad he arrives at an island were he finds
one man, a negro, as tall as a palm-tree, and with a single eye in the
middle of his forehead. He takes up the crew, one by one, and selects
the fattest as first to be devoured. This is done a second time. At
length nine of the boldest seize on a spit, while he lay on his back
asleep, and, having heated it red-hot, thrust it into his eye.--This
is precisely the story of Ulysses and the Cyclops.

The story of the Little Hunchback, who is choaked with a fish-bone,
and, after having brought successive individuals into trouble on the
suspicion of murdering him, is restored to life again, is nearly the
best known of the Arabian Tales. The merry jest of Dan Hew, Monk of
Leicester, who "once was hanged, and four times slain," bears a very
striking resemblance to this. [149]

A similar resemblance is to be found, only changing the sex of the
aggressor, between the well known tale of Patient Grizzel, and that of
Cheheristany in the Persian Tales. This lady was a queen of the Gins,
who fell in love with the emperor of China, and agrees to marry him
upon condition that she shall do what she pleases, and he shall never
doubt that what she does is right. She bears him a son, beautiful as
the day, and throws him into the fire. She bears him a daughter, and
gives her to a white bitch, who runs away with her, and disappears.
The emperor goes to war with the Moguls; and the queen utterly
destroys the provisions of his army. But the fire was a salamander,
and the bitch a fairy, who rear the children in the most admirable
manner; and the provisions of the army were poisoned by a traitor, and
are in a miraculous manner replaced by such as were wholesome and of
the most invigorating qualities.


CAUSES OF HUMAN CREDULITY.

Meanwhile, though the stories above related are extracted from books
purely and properly of fiction, they  exhibit so just a delineation of
Eastern manners and habits of mind, that, in the defect of materials
strictly historical, they may to a certain degree supply the place.
The principal feature they set before us is credulity and a love of
the marvellous. This is ever found characteristic of certain ages of
the world; but in Asia it prevails in uninterrupted continuity.
Wherever learning and the exercise of the intellectual faculties first
shew themselves, there mystery and a knowledge not to be communicated
but to the select few must be expected to appear. Wisdom in its
natural and genuine form seeks to diffuse itself; but in the East on
the contrary it is only valued in proportion to its rarity. Those who
devoted themselves to intellectual improvement, looked for it rather
in solitary abstraction, than in free communication with the minds of
others; and, when they condescended to the use of the organ of speech,
they spoke in enigmas and ambiguities, and in phrases better adapted
to produce wonder and perplexity, than to enlighten and instruct. When
the more consummate instructed the novice, it was by slow degrees only,
and through the medium of a long probation. In consequence of this
state of things the privileged few conceived of their own attainments
with an over-weening pride, and were puffed up with a sense of
superiority; while the mass of their fellow-creatures looked to them
with astonishment; and, agreeably to the Oriental creed of two
independent and contending principles of good and of evil, regarded
these select and supernaturally endowed beings anon as a source of the
most enviable blessings, and anon as objects of unmingled apprehension
and terror, before whom their understandings became prostrate, and
every thing that was most appalling and dreadful was most easily
believed. In this state superstition unavoidably grew infectious; and
the more the seniors inculcated and believed, the more the imagination
of the juniors became a pliant and unresisting slave.

The Mantra, or charm, consisting of a few unintelligible words
repeated again and again, always accompanied, or rather preceded, the
supposed miraculous phenomenon that was imposed on the ignorant. Water
was flung over, or in the face of, the thing or person upon whom the
miraculous effect was to be produced. Incense was burned; and such
chemical substances were set on fire, the dazzling appearance of which
might confound the senses of the spectators. The whole consisted in
the art of the juggler. The first business was to act on the passions,
to excite awe and fear and curiosity in the parties; and next by a
sort of slight of hand, and by changes too rapid to be followed by an
unpractised eye, to produce phenomena, wholly unanticipated, and that
could not be accounted for. Superstition was further an essential
ingredient; and this is never perfect, but where the superior and more
active party regards himself as something more than human, and the
party acted upon beholds in the other an object of religious reverence,
or tingles with apprehension of he knows not what of fearful and
calamitous. The state of the party acted on, and indeed of either, is
never complete, till the senses are confounded, what is imagined is so
powerful as in a manner to exclude what is real, in a word, till, as
the poet expresses it, "function is smothered in surmise, and nothing
is, but what is not."

It is in such a state of the faculties that it is entirely natural and
simple, that one should mistake a mere dumb animal for one's relative
or near connection in disguise. And, the delusion having once begun,
the deluded individual gives to every gesture and motion of limb and
eye an explanation that forwards the deception. It is in the same way
that in ignorant ages the notion of changeling has been produced. The
weak and fascinated mother sees every feature with a turn of
expression unknown before, all the habits of the child appear
different and strange, till the parent herself denies her offspring,
and sees in the object so lately cherished and doated on, a monster
uncouth and horrible of aspect.



DARK AGES OF EUROPE


In Europe we are slenderly supplied with historians, and with
narratives exhibiting the manners and peculiarities of successive
races of men, from the time of Theodosius in the close of the fourth
century of the Christian era to the end of the tenth. Mankind during
that period were in an uncommon degree wrapped up in ignorance and
barbarism. We may be morally sure that this was an interval beyond all
others, in which superstition and an implicit faith in supernatural
phenomena predominated over this portion of the globe. The laws of
nature, and the everlasting chain of antecedents and consequents, were
little recognised. In proportion as illumination and science have
risen on the world, men have become aware that the succession of
events is universally operating, and that the frame of men and animals
is every where the same, modified only by causes not less unchangeable
in their influence than the internal constitution of the frame itself.
We have learned to explain much; we are able to predict and investigate
the course of things; and the contemplative and the wise are not less
intimately and profoundly persuaded that the process of natural events
is sure and simple and void of all just occasion for surprise and the
lifting up of hands in astonishment, where we are not yet familiarly
acquainted with the developement of the elements of things, as where
we are. What we have not yet mastered, we feel confidently persuaded
that the investigators that come after us will reduce to rules not
less obvious, familiar and comprehensible, than is to us the rising of
the sun, or the progress of animal and vegetable life from the first
bud and seed of existence to the last stage of decrepitude and decay.

But in these ages of ignorance, when but few, and those only the most
obvious, laws of nature were acknowledged, every event that was not of
almost daily occurrence, was contemplated with more or less of awe and
alarm. These men "saw God in clouds, and heard him in the wind."
Instead of having regard only to that universal Providence, which acts
not by partial impulses, but by general laws, they beheld, as they
conceived, the immediate hand of the Creator, or rather, upon most
occasions, of some invisible intelligence, sometimes beneficent, but
perhaps oftener malignant and capricious, interfering, to baffle the
foresight of the sage, to humble the pride of the intelligent, and to
place the discernment of the most gifted upon a level with the
drivellings of the idiot, and the ravings of the insane.

And, as in events men saw perpetually the supernatural and miraculous,
so in their fellow-creatures they continually sought, and therefore
frequently imagined that they found, a gifted race, that had command
over the elements, held commerce with the invisible world, and could
produce the most stupendous and terrific effects. In man, as we now
behold him, we can ascertain his nature, the strength and pliability
of his limbs, the accuracy of his eye, the extent of his intellectual
acquisitions, and the subtlety of his powers of thought, and can
therefore in a great measure anticipate what we have to hope or to
fear from him. Every thing is regulated by what we call natural means.
But, in the times I speak of, all was mysterious: the powers of men
were subject to no recognised laws: and therefore nothing that
imagination could suggest, exceeded the bounds of credibility. Some
men were supposed to be so rarely endowed that "a thousand liveried
angels" waited on them invisibly, to execute their behests for the
benefit of those they favoured; while, much oftener, the perverse and
crookedly disposed, who delighted in mischief, would bring on those to
whom, for whatever capricious reason, they were hostile, calamities,
which no sagacity could predict, and no merely human power could
baffle and resist.

After the tenth century enough of credulity remained, to display in
glaring colours the aberrations of the human mind, and to furnish
forth tales which will supply abundant matter for the remainder of
this volume. But previously to this period, we may be morally sure,
reigned most eminently the sabbath of magic and sorcery, when nothing
was too wild, and remote from the reality of things, not to meet with
an eager welcome, when terror and astonishment united themselves with
a nameless delight, and the auditor was alarmed even to a sort of
madness, at the same time that he greedily demanded an ever-fresh
supply of congenial aliment. The more the known laws of the universe
and the natural possibility of things were violated, with the stronger
marks of approbation was the tale received: while the dextrous
impostor, aware of the temper of his age, and knowing how most
completely to blindfold and lead astray his prepared dupes, made a
rich harvest of the folly of his contemporaries. But I am wrong to
call him an impostor. He imposed upon himself, no less than on the
gaping crowd. His discourses, even in the act of being pronounced, won
upon his own ear; and the dexterity with which he baffled the
observation of others, bewildered his ready sense, and filled him with
astonishment at the magnitude of his achievements. The accomplished
adventurer was always ready to regard himself rather as a sublime
being endowed with great and stupendous attributes, than as a pitiful
trickster. He became the God of his own idolatry, and stood astonished,
as the witch of Endor in the English Bible is represented to have done,
at the success of his incantations.

But all these things are passed away, and are buried in the gulf of
oblivion. A thousand tales, each more wonderful than the other, marked
the year as it glided away. Every valley had its fairies; and every
hill its giants. No solitary dwelling, unpeopled with human
inhabitants, was without its ghosts; and no church-yard in the absence
of day-light could be crossed with impunity. The gifted enchanter
"bedimmed

  The noon-tide sun, willed forth the mutinous winds,
  And 'twixt the green sea and the azured vault
  Set roaring war; to the dread, rattling thunder
  He gave forth fire, and rifted Jove's stout oak
  With his own bolt, the strong-based promontory
  He made to shake, and by the spurs plucked up
  The pine and cedar."

It is but a small remnant of these marvellous adventures that has been
preserved. The greater part of them are swallowed up in that gulf of
oblivion, to which are successively consigned after a brief interval
all events as they occur, except so far as their memory is preserved
through the medium of writing and records. From the eleventh century
commences a stream of historical relation, which since that time never
entirely eludes the search of the diligent enquirer. Before this
period there occasionally appears an historian or miscellaneous writer:
but he seems to start up by chance; the eddy presently closes over him,
and all is again impenetrable darkness.

When this succession of writers began, they were unavoidably induced
to look back upon the ages that had preceded them, and to collect here
and there from tradition any thing that appeared especially worthy of
notice. Of course any information they could glean was wild and
uncertain, deeply stamped with the credulity and wonder of an ignorant
period, and still increasing in marvellousness and absurdity from
every hand it passed through, and from every tongue which repeated it.


MERLIN.

One of the most extraordinary personages whose story is thus delivered
to us, is Merlin. He appears to have been contemporary with the period
of the Saxon invasion of Britain in the latter part of the fifth
century; but probably the earliest mention of his name by any writer
that has come down to us is not previous to the eleventh. We may the
less wonder therefore at the incredible things that are reported of
him. He is first mentioned in connection with the fortune of Vortigern,
who is represented by Geoffrey of Monmouth as at that time king of
England. The Romans having withdrawn their legions from this island,
the unwarlike Britons found themselves incompetent to repel the
invasions of the uncivilised Scots and Picts, and Vortigern perceived
no remedy but in inviting the Saxons from the northern continent to
his aid. The Saxons successfully repelled the invader; but, having
done this, they refused to return home. They determined to settle here,
and, having taken various towns, are represented as at length inviting
Vortigern and his principal nobility to a feast near Salisbury under
pretence of a peace, where they treacherously slew three hundred of
the chief men of the island, and threw Vortigern into chains. Here, by
way of purchasing the restoration of his liberty, they induced him to
order the surrender of London, York, Winchester, and other principal
towns. Having lost all his strong holds, he consulted his magicians as
to how he was to secure himself from this terrible foe. They advised
him to build an impregnable tower, and pointed out the situation where
it was to be erected. But so unfortunately did their advice succeed,
that all the work that his engineers did in the building one day, the
earth swallowed, so that no vestige was to be found on the next. The
magicians were consulted again on this fresh calamity; and they told
the king that that there was no remedying this disaster, other than by
cementing the walls of his edifice with the blood of a human being,
who was born of no human father.

Vortigern sent out his emissaries in every direction in search of this
victim; and at length by strange good fortune they lighted on Merlin
near the town of Caermarthen, who told them that his mother was the
daughter of a king, but that she had been got with child of him by a
being of an angelic nature, and not a man. No sooner had they received
this information, than they seized him, and hurried him away to
Vortigern as the victim required. But in presence of the king he
baffled the magicians; he told the king that the ground they had
chosen for his tower, had underneath it a lake, which being drained,
they would find at the bottom two dragons of inextinguishable
hostility, that under that form figured the Britons and Saxons, all of
which upon the experiment proved to be true.

Vortigern died shortly after, and was succeeded first by Ambrosius,
and then by Uther Pendragon. Merlin was the confident of all these
kings. To Uther he exhibited a very criminal sort of compliance. Uther
became desperately enamoured of Igerna, wife of the duke of Cornwal,
and tried every means to seduce her in vain. Having consulted Merlin,
the magician contrived by an extraordinary unguent to metamorphose
Uther into the form of the duke. The duke had shut up his wife for
safety in a very strong tower; but Uther in his new form gained
unsuspected entrance; and the virtuous Igerna received him to her
embraces, by means of which he begot Arthur, afterwards the most
renowned sovereign of this island. Uther now contrived that the duke,
her husband, should be slain in battle, and immediately married the
fair Igerna, and made her his queen.

The next exploit of Merlin was with the intent to erect a monument
that should last for ever, to the memory of the three hundred British
nobles that were massacred by the Saxons. This design produced the
extraordinary edifice called Stonehenge. These mighty stones, which by
no human power could be placed in the position in which we behold them,
had originally been set up in Africa, and afterwards by means unknown
were transported to Ireland. Merlin commanded that they should be
carried over the sea, and placed where they now are, on Salisbury
Plain. The workmen, having received his directions, exerted all their
power and skill, but could not move one of them. Merlin, having for
some time watched their exertions, at length applied his magic; and to
the amazement of every one, the stones spontaneously quitted the
situation in which they had been placed, rose to a great height in the
air, and then pursued the course which Merlin had prescribed, finally
settling themselves in Wiltshire, precisely in the position in which
we now find them, and which they will for ever retain.

The last adventure recorded of Merlin proceeded from a project he
conceived for surrounding his native town of Caermarthen with a brazen
wall. He committed the execution of this project to a multitude of
fiends, who laboured upon the plan underground in a neighbouring
cavern. [150] In the mean while Merlin had become enamoured of a
supernatural being, called the Lady of the Lake. The lady had long
resisted his importunities, and in fact had no inclination to yield to
his suit. One day however she sent for him in great haste; and Merlin
was of course eager to comply with her invitation. Nevertheless,
before he set out, he gave it strictly in charge to the fiends, that
they should by no means suspend their labours till they saw him return.
The design of the lady was to make sport with him, and elude his
addresses. Merlin on the contrary, with the hope to melt her severity,
undertook to shew her the wonders of his art. Among the rest he
exhibited to her observation a tomb, formed to contain two bodies; at
the same time teaching her a charm, by means of which the sepulchre
would close, and never again be opened. The lady pretended not to
believe that the tomb was wide enough for its purpose, and inveigled
the credulous Merlin to enter it, and place himself as one dead. No
sooner had she so far succeeded, than she closed the lid of the
sepulchre, and pronouncing the charm, rendered it impossible that it
should ever be opened again till the day of judgment. Thus, according
to the story, Merlin was shut in, a corrupted and putrifying body with
a living soul, to which still inhered the faculty of returning in
audible sounds a prophetic answer to such as resorted to it as an
oracle. Meanwhile the fiends, at work in the cavern near Caermarthen,
mindful of the injunction of their taskmaster, not to suspend their
labours till his return, proceed for ever in their office; and the
traveller who passes that way, if he lays his ear close to the mouth
of the cavern, may hear a ghastly noise of iron chains and brazen
caldrons, the loud strokes of the hammer, and the ringing sound of the
anvil, intermixed with the pants and groans of the workmen, enough to
unsettle the brain and confound the faculties of him that for any time
shall listen to the din.

As six hundred years elapsed between the time of Merlin and the
earliest known records of his achievements, it is impossible to
pronounce what he really pretended to perform, and how great were the
additions which successive reporters have annexed to the wonders of
his art, more than the prophet himself perhaps ever dreamed of. In
later times, when the historians were the contemporaries of the
persons by whom the supposed wonders were achieved, or the persons who
have for these causes been celebrated have bequeathed certain literary
productions to posterity, we may be able to form some conjecture as to
the degree in which the heroes of the tale were deluding or deluded,
and may exercise our sagacity in the question by what strange
peculiarity of mind adventures which we now hold to be impossible
obtained so general belief. But in a case like this of Merlin, who
lived in a time so remote from that in which his history is first
known to have been recorded, it is impracticable to determine at what
time the fiction which was afterwards generally received began to be
reported, or whether the person to whom the miracles were imputed ever
heard or dreamed of the extraordinary things he is represented as
having achieved.


ST. DUNSTAN.

An individual scarcely less famous in the dark ages, and who, like
Merlin, lived in confidence with successive kings, was St. Dunstan. He
was born and died in the tenth century. It is not a little instructive
to employ our attention upon the recorded adventures, and incidents
occurring in the lives, of such men, since, though plentifully
interspersed with impossible tales, they serve to discover to us the
tastes and prepossessions of the times in which these men lived, and
the sort of accomplishments which were necessary to their success.

St. Dunstan is said to have been a man of distinguished birth, and to
have spent the early years of his life in much licentiousness. He was
however doubtless a person of the most extraordinary endowments of
nature. Ambition early lighted its fire in his bosom; and he displayed
the greatest facility in acquiring any talent or art on which he fixed
his attention. His career of profligacy was speedily arrested by a
dangerous illness, in which he was given over by his physicians. While
he lay apparently at the point of death, an angel was suddenly seen,
bringing a medicine to him which effected his instant cure. The saint
immediately rose from his bed, and hastened to the nearest church to
give God thanks for his recovery. As he passed along, the devil,
surrounded with a pack of black dogs, interposed himself to obstruct
his way. Dunstan however intrepidly brandished a rod that he held in
his hand, and his opposers took to flight. When he came to the church,
he found the doors closed. But the same angel, who effected his cure,
was at hand, and, taking him up softly by the hair of his head, placed
him before the high altar, where he performed his devotions with
suitable fervour.

That he might expiate the irregularities of his past life, St. Dunstan
now secluded himself entirely from the world, and constructed for his
habitation a cell in the abbey of Glastonbury, so narrow that he could
neither stand upright in it, nor stretch out his limbs in repose. He
took scarcely so much sustenance as would support life, and mortified
his flesh with frequent castigations.

He did not however pass his time during this seclusion in vacuity and
indolence. He pursued his studies with the utmost ardour, and made a
great proficiency in philosophy, divinity, painting, sculpture and
music. Above all, he was an admirable chemist, excelled in manufactures
of gold and other metals, and was distinguished by a wonderful skill
in the art of magic.

During all these mortifications and the severeness of his industry, he
appears to have become a prey to extraordinary visions and
imaginations. Among the rest, the devil visited him in his cell, and,
thrusting his head in at the window, disturbed the saint with obscene
and blasphemous speeches, and the most frightful contortions of the
features of his countenance. Dunstan at length, wearied out with his
perseverance, seized the red-hot tongs with which he was engaged in
some chemical experiment, and, catching the devil by the nose, held
him with the utmost firmness, while Satan filled the whole
neighbourhood for many miles round with his bellowings. Extraordinary
as this may appear, it constitutes one of the most prominent incidents
in the life of the saint; and the representations of it were for ever
repeated in ancient carvings, and in the illuminations of
church-windows.

This was the precise period at which the pope and his adherents were
gaining the greatest ascendancy in the Christian world. The doctrine
of transubstantiation was now in the highest vogue; and along with it
a precept still more essential to the empire of the Catholic church,
the celibacy of the clergy. This was not at first established without
vehement struggles. The secular clergy, who were required at once to
cast off their wives as concubines, and their children as bastards,
found every impulse of nature rising in arms against the mandate. The
regular clergy, or monks, were in obvious rivalship with the seculars,
and engrossed to themselves, as much as possible, all promotions and
dignities, as well ecclesiastical as civil. St. Augustine, who first
planted Christianity in this island, was a Benedictine monk; and the
Benedictines were for a long time in the highest reputation in the
Catholic church. St. Dunstan was also a Benedictine. In his time the
question of the celibacy of the clergy was most vehemently agitated;
and Dunstan was the foremost of the champions of the new institution
in England. The contest was carried on with great vehemence. Many of
the most powerful nobility, impelled either by pity for the sufferers,
or induced by family affinities, supported the cause of the seculars.
Three successive synods were held on the subject; and the cause of
nature it is said would have prevailed, had not Dunstan and his
confederates called in the influence of miracles to their aid. In one
instance, a crucifix, fixed in a conspicuous part of the place of
assembly, uttered a voice at the critical moment, saying, "Be steady!
you have once decreed right; alter not your ordinances." At another
time the floor of the place of meeting partially gave way,
precipitating the ungodly opposers of celibacy into the place beneath,
while Dunstan and his party, who were in another part of the assembly,
were miraculously preserved unhurt.

In these instances Dunstan seemed to be engaged in the cause of
religion, and might be considered as a zealous, though mistaken,
advocate of Christian simplicity and purity. But he was not contented
with figuring merely as a saint. He insinuated himself into the favour
of Edred, the grandson of Alfred, and who, after two or three short
reigns, succeeded to the throne. Edred was an inactive prince, but
greatly under the dominion of religious prejudices; and Dunstan, being
introduced to him, found him an apt subject for his machinations.
Edred first made him abbot of Glastonbury, one of the most powerful
ecclesiastical dignities in England, and then treasurer of the kingdom.
During the reign of this prince, Dunstan disposed of all ecclesiastical
affairs, and even of the treasures of the kingdom, at his pleasure.

But Edred filled the throne only nine years, and was succeeded by Edwy
at the early age of seventeen, who is said to have been endowed with
every grace of form, and the utmost firmness and intrepidity of spirit.
Dunstan immediately conceived a jealousy of these qualities, and took
an early opportunity to endeavour to disarm them. Edwy entertained a
passion for a princess of the royal house, and even proceeded to marry
her, though within the degrees forbidden by the canon law. The rest of
the story exhibits a lively picture of the manners of these barbarous
times. Odo, archbishop of Canterbury, the obedient tool of Dunstan, on
the day of the coronation obtruded himself with his abettor into the
private apartment, to which the king had retired with his queen, only
accompanied by her mother; and here the ambitious abbot, after loading
Edwy with the bitterest reproaches for his shameless sensuality,
thrust him back by main force into the hall, where the nobles of the
kingdom were still engaged at their banquet.

The spirited young prince conceived a deep resentment of this unworthy
treatment, and, seizing an opportunity, called Dunstan to account for
malversation in the treasury during the late king's life-time. The
priest refused to answer; and the issue was that he was banished the
realm.

But he left behind him a faithful and implicit coadjutor in archbishop
Odo. This prelate is said actually to have forced his way with a party
of soldiers into the palace, and, having seized the queen, barbarously
to have seared her cheeks with a red-hot iron, and sent her off a
prisoner to Ireland. He then proceeded to institute all the forms of a
divorce, to which the unhappy king was obliged to submit. Meanwhile
the queen, having recovered her beauty, found means to escape, and,
crossing the Channel, hastened to join her husband. But here again the
priests manifested the same activity as before. They intercepted the
queen in her journey, and by the most cruel means undertook to make
her a cripple for life. The princess however sunk under the experiment,
and ended her existence and her woes together.

A rebellion was now excited against the sacrilegious Edwy; and the
whole north of England, having rebelled, was placed under the dominion
of his brother, a boy of thirteen years of age. In the midst of these
adventures Dunstan returned from the continent, and fearlessly shewed
himself in his native country. His party was every where triumphant;
Odo being dead, he was installed archbishop of Canterbury, and Edwy,
oppressed with calamity on every side, sunk to an untimely grave.

The rest of the life of Dunstan was passed in comparatively
tranquillity. He made and unmade kings as he pleased. Edgar, the
successor of Edwy, discovered the happy medium of energy and authority
as a sovereign, combined with a disposition to indulge the ambitious
policy of the priesthood. He was licentious in his amours, without
losing a particle of his ascendancy as a sovereign. He however reigned
only a few years; but Dunstan at his death found means to place his
eldest son on the throne under his special protection, in defiance of
the intrigues of the ambitious Elfrida, the king's second wife, who
moved heaven and earth to cause the crown to descend upon her own son,
as yet comparatively an infant.

In this narrative we are presented with a lively picture of the means
by which ambition climbed to its purposes in the darkness of the tenth
century. Dunstan was enriched with all those endowments which might
seem in any age to lead to the highest distinction. Yet it would
appear to have been in vain that he was thus qualified, if he had not
stooped to arts that fell in with the gross prejudices of his
contemporaries. He had continual recourse to the aid of miracles. He
gave into practices of the most rigorous mortification. He studied,
and excelled in, all the learning and arts that were then known. But
his main dependence was on the art of magic. The story of his taking
the devil by the nose with a pair of red-hot tongs, seems to have been
of greater service to him than any other single adventure of his life.
In other times he might have succeeded in the schemes of his political
ambition by seemly and specious means. But it was necessary for him in
the times in which he lived, to proceed with eclat, and in a way that
should confound all opposers. The utmost resolution was required to
overwhelm those who might otherwise have been prompted to contend
against him. Hence it appears that he took a right measure of the
understanding of his contemporaries, when he dragged the young king
from the scene of his retirement, and brought him back by force into
the assembly of the nobles. And the inconceivable barbarity practised
to the queen, which would have rendered his name horrible in a more
civilised age, was exactly calculated to overwhelm the feelings and
subject the understandings of the men among whom he lived. The great
quality by which he was distinguished was confidence, a frame of
behaviour which shewed that he acted from the fullest conviction, and
never doubted that his proceedings had the immediate approbation of
heaven.




COMMUNICATION OF EUROPE AND THE SARACENS


It appears to have been about the close of the tenth century that the
more curious and inquisitive spirits of Europe first had recourse to
the East as a source of such information and art, as they found most
glaringly deficient among their countrymen. We have seen that in
Persia there was an uninterrupted succession of professors in the art
of magic: and, when the followers of Mahomet by their prowess had
gained the superiority over the greater part of Asia, over all that
was known of Africa, and a considerable tract of Europe, they
gradually became awake to the desire of cultivating the sciences, and
in particular of making themselves masters of whatever was most
liberal and eminent among the disciples of Zoroaster. To this they
added a curiosity respecting Greek learning, especially as it related
to medicine and the investigation of the powers of physical nature.
Bagdad became an eminent seat of learning; and perhaps, next to Bagdad,
Spain under the Saracens, or Moors, was a principal abode for the
professors of ingenuity and literature.


GERBERT, POPE SILVESTER II.

As a consequence of this state of things the more curious men of
Europe by degrees adopted the practice of resorting to Spain for the
purpose of enlarging their sphere of observation and knowledge. Among
others Gerbert is reported to have been the first of the Christian
clergy, who strung themselves up to the resolution of mixing with the
followers of Mahomet, that they might learn from thence things, the
knowledge of which it was impossible for them to obtain at home. This
generous adventurer, prompted by an insatiable thirst for information,
is said to have secretly withdrawn himself from his monastery of
Fleury in Burgundy, and to have spent several years among the Saracens
of Cordova. Here he acquired a knowledge of the language and learning
of the Arabians, particularly of their astronomy, geometry and
arithmetic; and he is understood to have been the first that imparted
to the north and west of Europe a knowledge of the Arabic numerals, a
science, which at first sight might be despised for its simplicity,
but which in its consequences is no inconsiderable instrument in
subtilising the powers of human intellect. He likewise introduced the
use of clocks. He is also represented to have made an extraordinary
proficiency in the art of magic; and among other things is said to
have constructed a brazen head, which would answer when it was spoken
to, and oracularly resolve many difficult questions. [151] The same
historian assures us that Gerbert by the art of necromancy made
various discoveries of hidden treasures, and relates in all its
circumstances the spectacle of a magic palace he visited underground,
with the multiplied splendours of an Arabian tale, but distinguished
by this feature, that, though its magnificence was dazzling to the
sight, it would not abide the test of feeling, but vanished into air,
the moment it was attempted to be touched.

It happened with Gerbert, as with St. Dunstan, that he united an
aspiring mind and a boundless spirit of ambition, with the
intellectual curiosity which has already been described. The first
step that he made into public life and the career for which he panted,
consisted in his being named preceptor, first to Robert, king of
France, the son of Hugh Capet, and next to Otho the Third, emperor of
Germany. Hugh Capet appointed him archbishop of Rheims; but, that
dignity being disputed with him, he retired into Germany, and,
becoming eminently a favourite with Otho the Third, he was by the
influence of that prince raised, first to be archbishop of Ravenna,
and afterwards to the papacy by the name of Silvester the Second. [152]

Cardinal Benno, who was an adherent of the anti-popes, and for that
reason is supposed to have calumniated Gerbert and several of his
successors, affirms that he was habitually waited on by demons, that
by their aid he obtained the papal crown, and that the devil to whom
he had sold himself, faithfully promised him that he should live, till
he had celebrated high mass at Jerusalem. This however was merely a
juggle of the evil spirit; and Gerbert actually died, shortly after
having officially dispensed the sacrament at the church of the Holy
Cross in Jerusalem, which is one of the seven districts of the city of
Rome. This event occurred in the year 1008. [153]


BENEDICT THE NINTH.

According to the same authority sorcery was at this time extensively
practised by some of the highest dignitaries of the church, and five
or six popes in succession were notorious for these sacrilegious
practices. About the same period the papal chair was at its lowest
state of degradation; this dignity was repeatedly exposed for sale;
and the reign of Gerbert, a man of consummate abilities and
attainments, is almost the only redeeming feature in the century in
which he lived. At length the tiara became the purchase of an
ambitious family, which had already furnished two popes, in behalf of
a boy of twelve years of age, who reigned by the name of Benedict the
Ninth. This youth, as he grew up, contaminated his rule with every
kind of profligacy and debauchery. But even he, according to Benno,
was a pupil in the school of Silvester, and became no mean proficient
in the arts of sorcery. Among other things he caused the matrons of
Rome by his incantations to follow him in troops among woods and
mountains, being bewitched and their souls subdued by the irresistible
charms of his magic. [154]


GREGORY THE SEVENTH.

Benno presents us with a regular catalogue of the ecclesiastical
sorcerers of this period: Benedict the Ninth, and Laurence, archbishop
of Melfi, (each of whom, he says, learned the art of Silvester),
John XX and Gregory VI. But his most vehement accusations are directed
against Gregory VII, who, he affirms, was in the early part of his
career, the constant companion and assistant of these dignitaries in
unlawful practices of this sort.

Gregory VII, whose original name was Hildebrand, is one of the great
champions of the Romish church, and did more than any other man to
establish the law of the celibacy of the clergy, and to take the
patronage of ecclesiastical dignities out of the hands of the laity.
He was eminently qualified for this undertaking by the severity of his
manners, and the inflexibility of his resolution to accomplish whatever
he undertook.

His great adversary was Henry the Fourth, emperor of Germany, a young
prince of high spirit, and at that time (1075) twenty-four years of
age. Gregory sent to summon him to Rome, to answer an accusation, that
he, as all his predecessors had done, being a layman, had conferred
ecclesiastical dignities. Henry refused submission, and was immediately
declared excommunicated. In retaliation for this offence, the emperor,
it is said, gave his orders to a chief of brigands, who, watching his
opportunity, seized the pope in the act of saying mass in one of the
churches of Rome, and carried him prisoner to a tower in the city
which was in the possession of this adventurer. But no sooner was this
known, than the citizens of Rome, rose _en masse_, and rescued
their spiritual father. Meanwhile Henry, to follow up his blow,
assembled a synod at Worms, who pronounced on the pope, that for
manifold crimes he was fallen from his supreme dignity, and
accordingly fulminated a decree of deposition against him. But Henry
had no forces to carry this decree into execution; and Gregory on his
side emitted a sentence of degradation against the emperor, commanding
the Germans to elect a new emperor in his place. It then became
evident that, in this age of ignorance and religious subjugation, the
spiritual arm, at least in Germany, was more powerful than the
temporal; and Henry, having maturely considered the perils that
surrounded him, took the resolution to pass the Alps with a few
domestics only, and, repairing to the presence of the pope, submit
himself to such penance as the pontiff should impose. Gregory was at
this time at Canosa, a fortress beyond Naples, which was surrounded
with three walls. Henry, without any attendant, was admitted within
the first wall. Here he was required to cast off all the symbols of
royalty, to put on a hair-shirt, and to wait barefoot his holiness's
pleasure. He stood accordingly, fasting from morn to eve, without
receiving the smallest notice from the pontiff. It was in the month of
January. He passed through the same trial the second day, and the
third. On the fourth day in the morning he was admitted to the
presence of the holy father. They parted however more irreconcileable
in heart than ever, though each preserved the appearance of good will.
The pope insisted that Henry should abide the issue of the congress in
Germany, of which he constituted himself president; and the emperor,
exasperated at the treatment he had received, resolved to keep no
terms with Gregory. Henry proceeded to the election of an anti-pope,
Clement the Third, and Gregory patronised a new emperor, Rodolph, duke
of Suabia. Henry had however generally been successful in his military
enterprises; and he defeated Rodolph in two battles, in the last of
which his opponent was slain. In the synod of Brixen, in which Clement
the Third was elected, Gregory was sentenced as a magician and a
necromancer. The emperor, puffed up with his victories, marched
against Rome, and took it, with the exception of the castle of St.
Angelo, in which the pope shut himself up; and in the mean time Henry
caused the anti-pope, his creature, to be solemnly inaugurated in the
church of the Lateran. Gregory however, never dismayed, and never at
an end of his expedients, called in the Normans, who had recently
distinguished themselves by their victories in Naples and Sicily.
Robert Guiscard, a Norman chieftain, drove the Germans out of Rome;
but, some altercations ensuing between the pontiff and his deliverer,
the city was given up to pillage, and Gregory was glad to take refuge
in Salerno, the capital of his Norman ally, where he shortly after
expired, an exile and a fugitive.

Gregory was no doubt a man of extraordinary resources and invincible
courage. He did not live to witness the triumph of his policy; but his
projects for the exaltation of the church finally met with every
success his most sanguine wishes could have aspired to. In addition to
all the rest it happened, that the countess Matilda, a princess who in
her own right possessed extensive sovereignties in Italy, nearly
commensurate with what has since been styled the ecclesiastical state,
transferred to the pope in her life-time, and confirmed by her
testament, all these territories, thus mainly contributing to render
him and his successors so considerable as temporal princes, as since
that time they have appeared.

It is, however, as a sorcerer, that Gregory VII (Hildebrand) finds a
place in this volume. Benno relates that, coming one day from his
Alban villa, he found, just as he was entering the church of the
Lateran, that he had left behind him his magical book, which he was
ascustomed to carry about his person. He immediately sent two trusty
servants to fetch it, at the same time threatening them most fearfully
if they should attempt to look into the volume. Curiosity however got
the better of their fear. They opened the book, and began to read;
when presently a number of devils appeared, saying, "We are come to
obey your commands, but, if we find ourselves trifled with, we shall
certainly fall upon and destroy you." The servants, exceedingly
terrified, replied, "Our will is that you should immediately throw
down so much of the wall of the city as is now before us." The devils
obeyed; and the servants escaped the danger that hung over them. [155]
It is further said, that Gregory was so expert in the arts of magic,
that he would throw out lightning by shaking his arm, and dart thunder
from his sleeve. [156]

But the most conspicuous circumstance in the life of Gregory that has
been made the foundation of a charge of necromancy against him, is
that, when Rodolph marched against Henry IV, the pope was so confident
of his success, as to venture publicly to prophesy, both in speech and
in writing, that his adversary should be conquered and perish in this
campaign. "Nay," he added, "this prophecy shall be accomplished before
St. Peter's day; nor do I desire any longer to be acknowledged for
pope, than on the condition that this comes to pass." It is added,
that Rodolph, relying on the prediction, six times renewed the battle,
in which finally he perished instead of his competitor. But this does
not go far enough to substantiate a charge of necromancy. It is
further remarked, that Gregory was deep in the pretended science of
judicial astrology; and this, without its being necessary to have
recourse to the solution of diabolical aid, may sufficiently account
for the undoubting certainty with which he counted on the event.

In the mean time this statement is of great importance, as illustrative
of the spirit of the times in general, and the character of Gregory in
particular. Rodolph, the competitor for the empire, has his mind wrought
up to such a pitch by this prophetic assurance, that, five times
repulsed, he yet led on his forces a sixth time, and perished the
victim of his faith. Nor were his followers less animated than he, and
from the same cause. We see also from the same story, that Gregory was
not an artful and crafty impostor, but a man spurred on by a genuine
enthusiasm. And this indeed is necessary to account for the whole of
his conduct. The audacity with which he opposed the claims of Henry,
and the unheard-of severity with which he treated him at the fortress
of Canosa, are to be referred to the same feature of character.
Invincible perseverance, when united with great resources of intellect
and a lofty spirit, will enable a man thoroughly to effect, what a
person of inferior endowments would not have dared so much as to dream
of. And Gregory, like St. Dunstan, achieved incredible things, by
skilfully adapting himself to circumstances, and taking advantage of
the temper and weakness of his contemporaries.


DUFF, KING OF SCOTLAND.

It is not to be wondered at, when such things occurred in Italy, the
principal seat of all the learning and refinement then existing in
Europe, that the extreme northerly and western districts should have
been given up to the blindest superstition. Among other instances we
have the following account in relation to Duff, king of Scotland, who
came to the crown about the year 968. He found his kingdom in the
greatest disorder from numerous bands of robbers, many of whom were
persons of high descent, but of no competent means of subsistence.
Duff resolved to put an end to their depredations, and to secure those
who sought a quiet support from cultivating the fruits of the earth
from forcible invasion. He executed the law against these disturbers
without respect of persons, and hence made himself many and powerful
enemies. In the midst of his activity however he suddenly fell sick,
and became confined to his bed. His physicians could no way account
for his distemper. They found no excess of any humour in his body to
which they could attribute his illness; his colour was fresh, and his
eyes lively; and he had a moderate and healthful appetite. But with
all this he was a total stranger to sleep; he burst out into
immoderate perspirations; and there was scarcely any thing that
remained of him, but skin and bone. In the meantime secret information
was brought that all this evil was the result of witchcraft. And, the
house being pointed out in which the sorcerers held their sabbath, a
band of soldiers was sent to surprise them. The doors being burst open,
they found one woman roasting upon a spit by the fire a waxen image of
the king, so like in every feature, that no doubt was entertained that
it was modelled by the art of the devil, while another sat by, busily
engaged in reciting certain verses of enchantment, by which means, as
the wax melted, the king was consumed with perspiration, and, as soon
as it was utterly dissolved, his death should immediately follow. The
witches were seized, and from their own confession burned alive. The
image was broken to pieces, and every fragment of it destroyed. And no
sooner was this effected, than Duff had all that night the most
refreshing and healthful sleep, and the next day rose without any
remains of his infirmity. [157]

This reprieve however availed him but for a short time. He was no
sooner recovered, than he occupied himself as before with pursuing the
outlaws, whom he brought indiscriminately to condign punishment. Among
these there chanced to be two young men, near relations of the
governor of the castle of Fores, who had hitherto been the king's most
faithful adherents. These young men had been deluded by ill company:
and the governor most earnestly sued to Duff for their pardon. But the
king was inexorable. Meanwhile, as he had always placed the most
entire trust in their father, he continued to do so without the
smallest suspicion. The night after the execution, the king slept in
the castle of Fores, as he had often done before; but the governor,
conceiving the utmost rancour at the repulse he had sustained, and
moreover instigated by his wife, in the middle of the night murdered
Duff in his bed, as he slept. His reign lasted only four years. [158]


MACBETH.

The seventh king of Scotland after Duff, with an interval of
sixty-eight years, was Macbeth. The historian begins his tale of
witchcraft, towards the end of the reign of Duncan, his predecessor,
with observing, "Shortly after happened a strange and uncouth wonder,
which afterward was the cause of much trouble in the realm of Scotland.
It fortuned, as Macbeth and Banquo journeyed towards Fores, where the
king as then lay, they went sporting by the way together, without
other company save only themselves, passing through the woods and
fields, when suddenly, in the midst of a laund, there met them three
women in strange and ferly apparel, resembling creatures of an elder
world, whom when they attentively beheld, wondering much at the sight,
the first of them spake and said, All hail, Macbeth, thane of Glamis
(for he had lately entered into that dignity and office by the death
of his father Synel). The second of them said, Hail, Macbeth, thane of
Cawdor. But the third said, All hail, Macbeth, that hereafter shall be
king of Scotland. Then Banquo, What sort of women, said he, are you,
that seem so little favourable unto me, whereas to my fellow here,
besides high offices, ye assign also the kingdom, appointing forth
nothing for me at all? Yes, saith the first of them, we promise
greater benefits unto thee than unto him, for he shall reign indeed,
but with an unlucky end, neither shall he leave any issue behind him
to succeed in his place; where contrarily thou indeed shall not reign
at all, but of thee those shall be born, which shall govern the
Scottish kingdom by long order of continual descent. Herewith the
foresaid women vanished immediately out of their sight.

"This was reputed at the first but some vain fantastical illusion by
Macbeth and Banquo, insomuch that Banquo would call Macbeth in jest
king of Scotland, and Macbeth again would call him in sport likewise
the father of many kings. But afterwards the common opinion was, that
these women were either the weird sisters, that is (as you would say)
the goddesses of destiny, or else some nymphs or fairies, endued with
knowledge of prophecy by their necromantical science, because every
thing came to pass as they had spoken.

"For shortly after, the thane of Cawdor, being condemned at Fores of
treason against the king committed, his lands, livings and offices
were given of the king's liberality unto Macbeth." [159]

Malcolm, the preceding king of Scotland, had two daughters, one of
them the mother of Duncan, and the other of Macbeth; and in virtue of
this descent Duncan succeeded to the crown. The accession of Macbeth
therefore was not very remote, if he survived the present king. Of
consequence Macbeth, though he thought much of the prediction of the
weird sisters, yet resolved to wait his time, thinking that, as had
happened in his former preferment, this might come to pass without his
aid. But Duncan had two sons, Malcolm Cammore and Donald Bane. The law
of succession in Scotland was, that, if at the death of the reigning
sovereign he that should succeed were not of sufficient age to take on
him the government, he that was next of blood to him should be
admitted. Duncan however at this juncture created his eldest son
Malcolm prince of Cumberland, a title which was considered as
designating him heir to the throne. Macbeth was greatly troubled at
this, as cutting off the expectation he thought he had a right to
entertain: and, the words of the weird sisters still ringing in his
ears, and his wife with ambitious speeches urging him to the deed, he,
in conjunction with some trusty friends, among whom was Banquo, came
to a resolution to kill the king at Inverness. The deed being
perpetrated, Malcolm, the eldest son of Duncan, fled for safety into
Cumberland, and Donald, the second, into Ireland. [160]

Macbeth, who became king of Scotland in the year 1010, reigned for ten
years with great popularity and applause, but at the end of that time
changed his manner of government, and became a tyrant. His first
action in this character was against Banquo. He remembered that the
weird sisters had promised to Banquo that he should be father to a
line of kings. Haunted with this recollection, Macbeth invited Banquo
and his son Fleance to a supper, and appointed assassins to murder
them both on their return. Banquo was slain accordingly; but Fleance,
under favour of the darkness of the night, escaped. [161]

This murder brought Macbeth into great odium, since every man began to
doubt of the security of his life, and Macbeth at the same time to
fear the ill will of his subjects. He therefore proceeded to destroy
all against whom he entertained any suspicion, and every day more and
more to steep his hands in blood. Further to secure himself, he built
a castle on the top of a high hill, called Dunsinnan, which was placed
on such an elevation, that it seemed impossible to approach it in a
hostile manner. This work he carried on by means of requiring the
thanes of the kingdom, each one in turn, to come with a set of workmen
to help forward the edifice. When it came to the turn of Macduff,
thane of Fife, he sent workmen, but did not come himself, as the
others had done. Macbeth from that time regarded Macduff with an eye
of perpetual suspicion. [162]

Meanwhile Macbeth, remembering that the origin of his present
greatness consisted in the prophecy of the weird sisters, addicted
himself continually to the consulting of wizards. Those he consulted
gave him a pointed warning to take heed of Macduff, who in time to
come would seek to destroy him. This warning would unquestionably have
proved fatal to Macduff; had not on the other hand Macbeth been buoyed
up in security, by the prediction of a certain witch in whom he had
great trust, that he should never be vanquished till the wood of
Bernane came to the castle of Dunsinnan, and that he should not be
slain by any man that was born of a woman; both which he judged to be
impossibilities. [163]

This vain confidence however urged him to do many outrageous things;
at the same time that such was his perpetual uneasiness of mind, that
in every nobleman's house he had one servant or another in fee, that
he might be acquainted with every thing that was said or meditated
against him. About this time Macduff fled to Malcolm, who had now
taken refuge in the court of Edward the Confessor; and Macbeth came
with a strong party into Fife with the purpose of surprising him. The
master being safe, those within Macduff's castle threw open the gates,
thinking that no mischief would result from receiving the king. But
Macbeth, irritated that he missed of his prey, caused Macduff's wife
and children, and all persons who were found within the castle, to be
slain. [164]

Shortly after, Malcolm and Macduff, reinforced by ten thousand English
under the command of Seyward, earl of Northumberland, marched into
Scotland. The subjects of Macbeth stole away daily from him to join
the invaders; but he had such confidence in the predictions that had
been delivered to him, that he still believed he should never be
vanquished. Malcolm meanwhile, as he approached to the castle of
Dunsinnan, commanded his men to cut down, each of them, a bough from
the wood of Bernane, as large as he could bear, that they might take
the tyrant the more by surprise. Macbeth saw, and thought the wood
approached him; but he remembered the prophecy, and led forth and
marshalled his men. When however the enemy threw down their boughs,
and their formidable numbers stood revealed, Macbeth and his forces
immediately betook themselves to flight. Macduff pursued him, and was
hard at his heels, when the tyrant turned his horse, and exclaimed,
"Why dost thou follow me? Know, that it is ordained that no creature
born of a woman can ever overcome me." Macduff instantly retorted, "I
am the man appointed to slay thee. I was not born of a woman, but was
untimely ripped from my mother's womb." And, saying this, he killed
him on the spot. Macbeth reigned in the whole seventeen years. [165]


VIRGIL.

One of the most curious particulars, and which cannot be omitted in a
history of sorcery, is the various achievements in the art of magic
which have been related of the poet Virgil. I bring them in here,
because they cannot be traced further back than the eleventh or
twelfth century. The burial-place of this illustrious man was at
Pausilippo, near Naples; the Neapolitans had for many centuries
cherished a peculiar reverence for his memory; and it has been
supposed that the old ballads, and songs of the minstrels of the north
of Italy, first originated this idea respecting him. [166] The vulgar
of this city, full of imagination and poetry, conceived the idea of
treating him as the guardian genius of the place; and, in bodying
forth this conception, they represented him in his life-time as gifted
with supernatural powers, which he employed in various ways for the
advantage of a city that he so dearly loved. Be this as it will, it
appears that Gervais of Tilbury, chancellor to Otho the Fourth,
emperor of Germany, Helinandus, a Cisterian monk, and Alexander Neckam,
all of whom lived about this time, first recorded these particulars in
their works.

They tell us, that Virgil placed a fly of brass over one of the gates
of the city, which, as long as it continued there, that is, for a
space of eight years, had the virtue of keeping Naples clear from
moskitoes and all noxious insects: that he built a set of shambles,
the meat in which was at all times free from putrefaction: that he
placed two images over the gates of the city, one of which was named
Joyful, and the other Sad, one of resplendent beauty, and the other
hideous and deformed, and that whoever entered the town under the
former image would succeed in all his undertakings, and under the
latter would as certainly miscarry: that he caused a brazen statue to
be erected on a mountain near Naples, with a trumpet in his mouth,
which when the north wind blew, sounded so shrill as to drive to the
sea the fire and smoke which issued from the neighbouring forges of
Vulcan: that he built different baths at Naples, specifically prepared
for the cure of every disease, which were afterwards demolished by the
malice of the physicians: and that he lighted a perpetual fire for the
refreshment of all travellers, close to which he placed an archer of
brass, with his bow bent, and this inscription, "Whoever strikes me, I
will let fly my arrow:" that a fool-hardy fellow notwithstanding
struck the statue, when the arrow was immediately shot into the fire,
and the fire was extinguished. It is added, that, Naples being
infested with a vast multitude of contagious leeches, Virgil made a
leech of gold, which he threw into a pit, and so delivered the city
from the infection: that he surrounded his garden with a wall of air,
within which the rain never fell: that he built a bridge of brass that
would transport him wherever he pleased: that he made a set of statues,
which were named the salvation of Rome, which had the property that,
if any one of the subject nations prepared to revolt, the statue,
which bore the name of, and was adored by that nation, rung a bell,
and pointed with its finger in the direction of the danger: that he
made a head, which had the virtue of predicting things future: and
lastly, amidst a world of other wonders, that he cut a subterranean
passage through mount Pausilippo, that travellers might pass with
perfect safety, the mountain having before been so infested with
serpents and dragons, that no one could venture to cross it.


ROBERT OF LINCOLN.

The most eminent person next, after popes Silvester II and Gregory VII,
who labours under the imputation of magic, is Robert Grossetête, or
Robert of Lincoln, appointed bishop of that see in the year 1235. He
was, like those that have previously been mentioned, a man of the most
transcendant powers of mind, and extraordinary acquirements. His
parents are said to have been so poor, that he was compelled, when a
boy, to engage in the meanest offices for bread, and even to beg on
the highway. At length the mayor of Lincoln, struck with his
appearance, and the quickness of his answers to such questions as were
proposed to him, took him into his family, and put him to school. Here
his ardent love of learning, and admirable capacity for acquiring it,
soon procured him many patrons, by whose assistance he was enabled to
prosecute his studies, first at Cambridge, afterwards at Oxford, and
finally at Paris. He was master of the Greek and Hebrew languages,
then very rare accomplishments; and is pronounced by Roger Bacon, a
very competent judge, of whom we shall presently have occasion to
speak, to have spent much of his time, for nearly forty years, in the
study of geometry, astronomy, optics, and other branches of
mathematical learning, in all of which he much excelled. So that, as
we are informed from the same authority, this same Robert of Lincoln,
and his friend, Friar Adam de Marisco, were the two most learned men
in the world, and excelled the rest of mankind in both human and
divine knowledge.

This great man especially distinguished himself by his firm and
undaunted opposition to the corruptions of the court of Rome. Pope
Innocent IV, who filled the papal chair upwards of eleven years, from
1243 to 1254, appears to have exceeded all his predecessors in the
shamelessness of his abuses. We are told, that the hierarchy of the
church of England was overwhelmed like a flood with an inundation of
foreign dignitaries, of whom not a few were mere boys, for the most
part without learning, ignorant of the language of the island, and
incapable of benefiting the people nominally under their care, the
more especially as they continued to dwell in their own countries, and
scarcely once in their lives visited the sees to which they had been
appointed. [167] Grossetête lifted up his voice against these scandals.
He said that it was impossible the genuine apostolic see, which
received its authority from the Lord Jesus for edification, and not
for destruction, could be guilty of such a crime, for that would
forfeit all its glory, and plunge it into the pains of hell. He did
not scruple therefore among his most intimate friends to pronounce the
reigning pope to be the true Antichrist; and he addressed the pontiff
himself in scarcely more measured terms.

Among the other accomplishments of bishop Grossetête he is said to
have been profoundly skilled in the art of magic: and the old poet
Gower relates of him that he made a head of brass, expressly
constructed in such a manner as to be able to answer such questions as
were propounded to it, and to foretel future events.


MICHAEL SCOT.

Michael Scot of Balwirie in the county of Fife, was nearly contemporary
with bishop Grossetête. He was eminent for his knowledge of the Greek
and Arabic languages. He was patronised by the emperor Frederic II,
who encouraged him to undertake a translation of the works of Aristotle
into Latin. He addicted himself to astrology, chemistry, and the still
more frivolous sciences of chiromancy and physiognomy. It does not
appear that he made any pretences to magic; but the vulgar, we are
told, generally regarded him as a sorcerer, and are said to have
carried their superstition so far as to have conceived a terror of so
much as touching his works.


THE DEAN OF BADAJOZ.

There is a story related by this accomplished scholar, in a collection
of aphorisms and anecdotes entitled _Mensa Philosophica_, which
deserves to be cited as illustrating the ideas then current on the
subject of sorcery. A certain great necromancer, or nigromancer, had
once a pupil of considerable rank, who professed himself extremely
desirous for once to have the gratification of believing himself an
emperor. The necromancer, tired with his importunities, at length
assented to his prayer. He took measures accordingly, and by his
potent art caused his scholar to believe that one province and dignity
fell to him after another, till at length his utmost desires became
satisfied. The magician however appeared to be still at his elbow; and
one day, when the scholar was in the highest exultation at his good
fortune, the master humbly requested him to bestow upon him some
landed possession, as a reward for the extraordinary benefit he had
conferred. The imaginary emperor cast upon the necromancer a glance of
the utmost disdain and contempt. "Who are you?" said he, "I really
have not the smallest acquaintance with you." "I am he," replied the
magician, with withering severity of countenance and tone, "that gave
you all these things, and will take them away." And, saying this, the
illusion with which the poor scholar had been inebriated, immediately
vanished; and he became what he had before been, and no more.

The story thus briefly told by Michael Scot, afterwards passed through
many hands, and was greatly dilated. In its last form by the abbé
Blanchet, it constituted the well known and agreeable tale of the dean
of Badajoz. This reverend divine comes to a sorcerer, and intreats a
specimen of his art. The magician replies that he had met with so many
specimens of ingratitude, that he was resolved to be deluded no more.
The dean persists, and at length overcomes the reluctance of the
master. He invites his guest into the parlour, and orders his cook to
put two partridges to the fire, for that the dean of Badajoz will sup
with him. Presently he begins his incantations; and the dean becomes
in imagination by turns a bishop, a cardinal, and a pope. The magician
then claims his reward. Meanwhile the dean, inflated with his supposed
elevation, turns to his benefactor, and says, "I have learned with
grief that, under pretence of secret science, you correspond with the
prince of darkness. I command you to repent and abjure; and in the
mean time I order you to quit the territory of the church in three
days, under pain of being delivered to the secular arm, and the rigour
of the flames." The sorcerer, having been thus treated, presently
dissolves the incantation, and calls aloud to his cook, "Put down but
one partridge, the dean of Badajoz does not sup with me to-night."


MIRACLE OF THE TUB OF WATER.

This story affords an additional example of the affinity between the
ancient Asiatic and European legends, so as to convince us that it is
nearly impossible that the one should not be in some way borrowed from
the other. There is, in a compilation called the Turkish Tales, a
story of an infidel sultan of Egypt, who took the liberty before a
learned Mahometan doctor, of ridiculing some of the miracles ascribed
to the prophet, as for example his transportation into the seventh
heaven, and having ninety thousand conferences with God, while in the
mean time a pitcher of water, which had been thrown down in the first
step of his ascent, was found with the water not all spilled at his
return.

The doctor, who had the gift of working miracles, told the sultan that,
with his consent, he would give him a practical proof of the
possibility of the circumstance related of Mahomet. The sultan agreed.
The doctor therefore directed that a huge tub of water should be
brought in, and, while the prince stood before it with his courtiers
around, the holy man bade him plunge his head into the water, and draw
it out again. The sultan immersed his head, and had no sooner done so,
than he found himself alone at the foot of a mountain on a desert
shore. The prince first began to rave against the doctor for this
piece of treachery and witchcraft. Perceiving however that all his
rage was vain, and submitting himself to the imperiousness of his
situation, he began to seek for some habitable tract. By and by he
discovered people cutting down wood in a forest, and, having no remedy,
he was glad to have recourse to the same employment. In process of
time he was brought to a town; and there by great good fortune, after
other adventures, he married a woman of beauty and wealth, and lived
long enough with her, for her to bear him seven sons and seven
daughters. He was afterwards reduced to want, so as to be obliged to
ply in the streets as a porter for his livelihood. One day, as he
walked alone on the sea-shore, ruminating on his hard fate, he was
seized with a fit of devotion, and threw off his clothes, that he
might wash himself, agreeably to the Mahometan custom, previously to
saying his prayers. He had no sooner however plunged into the sea, and
raised his head again above water, than he found himself standing by
the side of the tub that had been brought in, with all the great
persons of his court round him, and the holy man close at his side. He
found that the long series of imaginary adventures he had passed
through, had in reality occupied but one minute of time.


INSTITUTION OF FRIARS.

About this time a great revolution took place in the state of
literature in Europe. The monks, who at one period considerably
contributed to preserve the monuments of ancient learning, memorably
fell off in reputation and industry. Their communities by the
donations of the pious grew wealthy; and the monks themselves
inhabited splendid palaces, and became luxurious, dissipated and idle.
Upon the ruins of their good fame rose a very extraordinary race of
men, called Friars. The monks professed celibacy, and to have no
individual property; but the friars abjured all property, both private
and in common. They had no place where to lay their heads, and
subsisted as mendicants upon the alms of their contemporaries. They
did not hide themselves in refectories and dormitories, but lived
perpetually before the public. In the sequel indeed they built
Friaries for their residence; but these were no less distinguished for
the simplicity and humbleness of their appearance, than the monasteries
were for their grandeur and almost regal magnificence. The Friars were
incessant in preaching and praying, voluntarily exposed themselves to
the severest hardships, and were distinguished by a fervour of devotion
and charitable activity that knew no bounds. We might figure them to
ourselves as swallowed up in these duties. But they added to their
merits an incessant earnestness in learning and science. A new era in
intellect and subtlety of mind began with them; and a set of the most
wonderful men in depth of application, logical acuteness, and
discoveries in science distinguished this period. They were few indeed,
in comparison of the world of ignorance that every where surrounded
them; but they were for that reason only the more conspicuous. They
divided themselves principally into two orders, the Dominicans and
Franciscans. And all that was most illustrious in intellect at this
period belonged either to the one or the other.


ALBERTUS MAGNUS.

Albertus Magnus, a Dominican, was one of the most famous of these. He
was born according to some accounts in the year 1193, and according to
others in 1205. It is reported of him, that he was naturally very dull,
and so incapable of instruction, that he was on the point of quitting
the cloister from despair of learning what his vocation required, when
the blessed virgin appeared to him in a vision, and enquired of him in
which he desired to excel, philosophy or divinity. He chose philosophy;
and the virgin assured him that he should become incomparable in that,
but, as a punishment for not having chosen divinity, he should sink,
before he died, into his former stupidity. It is added that, after
this apparition, he had an infinite deal of wit, and advanced in
science with so rapid a progress as utterly to astonish the masters.
He afterwards became bishop of Ratisbon.

It is related of Albertus, that he made an entire man of brass,
putting together its limbs under various constellations, and occupying
no less than thirty years in its formation. This man would answer all
sorts of questions, and was even employed by its maker as a domestic.
But what is more extraordinary, this machine is said to have become at
length so garrulous, that Thomas Aquinas, being a pupil of Albertus,
and finding himself perpetually disturbed in his abstrusest
speculations by its uncontrolable loquacity, in a rage caught up a
hammer, and beat it to pieces. According to other accounts the man of
Albertus Magnus was composed, not of metal, but of flesh and bones
like other men; but this being afterwards judged to be impossible, and
the virtue of images, rings, and planetary sigils being in great vogue,
it was conceived that this figure was formed of brass, and indebted
for its virtue to certain conjunctions and aspects of the planets.
[168]

A further extraordinary story is told of Albertus Magnus, well
calculated to exemplify the ideas of magic with which these ages
abounded. William, earl of Holland, and king of the Romans, was
expected at a certain time to pass through Cologne. Albertus had set
his heart upon obtaining from this prince the cession of a certain
tract of land upon which to erect a convent. The better to succeed in
his application he conceived the following scheme. He invited the
prince on his journey to partake of a magnificent entertainment. To
the surprise of every body, when the prince arrived, he found the
preparations for the banquet spread in the open air. It was in the
depth of winter, when the earth was bound up in frost, and the whole
face of things was covered with snow. The attendants of the court were
mortified, and began to express their discontent in loud murmurs. No
sooner however was the king with Albertus and his courtiers seated at
table, than the snow instantly disappeared, the temperature of summer
shewed itself, and the sun burst forth with a dazzling splendour. The
ground became covered with the richest verdure; the trees were clothed
at once with foliage, flowers and fruits: and a vintage of the richest
grapes, accompanied with a ravishing odour, invited the spectators to
partake. A thousand birds sang on every branch. A train of pages
shewed themselves, fresh and graceful in person and attire, and were
ready diligently to supply the wants of all, while every one was
struck with astonishment as to who they were and from whence they came.
The guests were obliged to throw off their upper garments the better
to cool themselves. The whole assembly was delighted with their
entertainment, and Albertus easily gained his suit of the king.
Presently after, the banquet disappeared; all was wintry and solitary
as before; the snow lay thick upon the ground; and the guests in all
haste snatched up the garments they had laid aside, and hurried into
the apartments, that by numerous fires on the blazing hearth they
might counteract the dangerous chill which threatened to seize on
their limbs. [169]


ROGER BACON.

Roger Bacon, of whom extraordinary stories of magic have been told,
and who was about twenty years younger than Albertus, was one of the
rarest geniuses that have existed on earth. He was a Franciscan friar.
He wrote grammars of the Latin, Greek and Hebrew languages. He was
profound in the science of optics. He explained the nature of
burning-glasses, and of glasses which magnify and diminish, the
microscope and the telescope. He discovered the composition of
gunpowder. He ascertained the true length of the solar year; and his
theory was afterwards brought into general use, but upon a narrow
scale, by Pope Gregory XIII, nearly three hundred years after his
death. [170]

But for all these discoveries he underwent a series of the most bitter
persecutions. It was imputed to him by the superiors of his order that
the improvements he suggested in natural philosophy were the effects
of magic, and were suggested to him through an intercourse with
infernal spirits. They forbade him to communicate any of his
speculations. They wasted his frame with rigorous fasting, often
restricting him to a diet of bread and water, and prohibited all
strangers to have access to him. Yet he went on indefatigably in
pursuit of the secrets of nature. [171] At length Clement IV, to whom
he appealed, procured him a considerable degree of liberty. But, after
the death of that pontiff, he was again put under confinement, and
continued in that state for a further period of ten years. He was
liberated but a short time before his death.

Freind says, [172] that, among other ingenious contrivances, he put
statues in motion, and drew articulate sounds from a brazen head, not
however by magic, but by an artificial application of the principles
of natural philosophy.   This probably furnished a foundation for the
tale of Friar Bacon and Friar Bungy, which was one of the earliest
productions to which the art of printing was applied in England. These
two persons are said to have entertained the project of inclosing
England with a wall, so as to render it inaccessible to any invader.
They accordingly raised the devil, as the person best able to inform
them how this was to be done. The devil advised them to make a brazen
head, with all the internal structure and organs of a human head. The
construction would cost them much time; and they must then wait with
patience till the faculty of speech descended upon it. It would
finally however become an oracle, and, if the question were propounded
to it, would teach them the solution of their problem. The friars
spent seven years in bringing the structure to perfection, and then
waited day after day, in expectation that it would utter articulate
sounds. At length nature became exhausted in them, and they lay down
to sleep, having first given it strictly in charge to a servant of
theirs, clownish in nature, but of strict fidelity, that he should
awaken them the moment the image began to speak. That period arrived.
The head uttered sounds, but such as the clown judged unworthy of
notice. "Time is!" it said. No notice was taken; and a long pause
ensued. "Time was!" A similar pause, and no notice. "Time is passed!"
And the moment these words were uttered, a tremendous storm ensued,
with thunder and lightning, and the head was shivered into a thousand
pieces. Thus the experiment of friar Bacon and friar Bungy came to
nothing.


THOMAS AQUINAS.

Thomas Aquinas, who has likewise been brought under the imputation of
magic, was one of the profoundest scholars and subtlest logicians of
his day. He also furnishes a remarkable instance of the ascendant
which the friars at that time obtained over the minds of ingenuous
young men smitten with the thirst of knowledge. He was a youth of
illustrious birth, and received the rudiments of his education under
the monks of Monte Cassino, and in the university of Naples. But, not
contented with these advantages, he secretly entered himself into the
society of Preaching Friars, or Dominicans, at seventeen years of age.
His mother, being indignant that he should thus take the vow of
poverty, and sequester himself from the world for life, employed every
means in her power to induce him to alter his purpose, but in vain.
The friars, to deliver him from her importunities, removed him from
Naples to Terracina, from Terracina to Anagnia, and from Anagnia to
Rome. His mother followed him in all these changes of residence, but
was not permitted so much as to see him. At length she spirited up his
two elder brothers to seize him by force. They waylaid him in his road
to Paris, whither he was sent to complete his course of instruction,
and carried him off to the castle of Aquino where he had been born.
Here he was confined for two years; but he found a way to correspond
with the superiors of his order, and finally escaped from a window in
the castle. St. Thomas Aquinas (for he was canonised after his death)
exceeded perhaps all men that ever existed in the severity and
strictness of his metaphysical disquisitions, and thus acquired the
name of the Seraphic Doctor.

It was to be expected that a man, who thus immersed himself in the
depths of thought, should be an inexorable enemy to noise and
interruption. We have seen that he dashed to pieces the artificial man
of brass, that Albertus Magnus, who was his tutor, had spent thirty
years in bringing to perfection, being impelled to this violence by
its perpetual and unceasing garrulity. [173] It is further said, that
his study being placed in a great thoroughfare, where the grooms were
all day long exercising their horses, he found it necessary to apply a
remedy to this nuisance. He made by the laws of magic a small horse of
brass, which he buried two or three feet under ground in the midst of
this highway; and, having done so, no horse would any longer pass
along the road. It was in vain that the grooms with whip and spur
sought to conquer their repugnance. They were finally compelled to
give up the attempt, and to choose another place for their daily
exercise. [174]

It has further been sought to fix the imputation of magic upon Thomas
Aquinas by imputing to him certain books written on that science; but
these are now acknowledged to be spurious. [175]


PETER OF APONO.

Peter of Apono, so called from a village of that name in the vicinity
of Padua, where he was born in the year 1250, was an eminent
philosopher, mathematician and astrologer, but especially excelled in
physic. Finding that science at a low ebb in his native country, he
resorted to Paris, where it especially flourished; and after a time
returning home, exercised his art with extraordinary success, and by
this means accumulated great wealth.

But all his fame and attainments were poisoned to him by the accusation
of magic. Among other things he was said to possess seven spirits,
each of them inclosed in a crystal vessel, from whom he received every
information he desired in the seven liberal arts. He was further
reported to have had the extraordinary faculty of causing the money he
expended in his disbursements, immediately to come back into his own
purse. He was besides of a hasty and revengeful temper. In consequence
of this it happened to him, that, having a neighbour, who had an
admirable spring of water in his garden, and who was accustomed to
suffer the physician to send for a daily supply, but who for some
displeasure or inconvenience withdrew his permission, Peter d'Apono,
by the aid of the devil, removed the spring from the garden in which
it had flowed, and turned it to waste in the public street. For some
of these accusations he was called to account by the tribunal of the
inquisition. While he was upon his trial however, the unfortunate man
died. But so unfavourable was the judgment of the inquisitors
respecting him, that they decreed that his bones should be dug up, and
publicly burned. Some of his friends got intimation of this, and saved
him from the impending disgrace by removing his remains. Disappointed
in this, the inquisitors proceeded to burn him in effigy.


ENGLISH LAW OF HIGH TREASON.

It may seem strange that in a treatise concerning necromancy we should
have occasion to speak of the English law of high treason. But on
reflection perhaps it may appear not altogether alien to the subject.
This crime is ordinarily considered by our lawyers as limited and
defined by the statute of 25 Edward III. As Blackstone has observed,
"By the ancient common law there was a great latitude left in the
breast of the judges, to determine what was treason, or not so:
whereby the creatures of tyrannical power had opportunity to create
abundance of constructive treasons; that is, to raise, by forced and
arbitrary constructions, offences into the crime and punishment of
treason, which were never suspected to be such. To prevent these
inconveniences, the statute of 25 Edward III was made." [176] This
statute divides treason into seven distinct branches; and the first
and chief of these is, "when a man doth compass or imagine the death
of our lord the king."

Now the first circumstance that strikes us in this affair is, why the
crime was not expressed in more perspicuous and appropriate language?
Why, for example, was it not said, that the first and chief branch of
treason was to "kill the king?" Or, if that limitation was not held to
be sufficiently ample, could it not have been added, it is treason to
"attempt, intend, or contrive to kill the king?" We are apt to make
much too large an allowance for what is considered as the vague and
obsolete language of our ancestors. Logic was the element in which the
scholars of what are called the dark ages were especially at home. It
was at that period that the description of human geniuses, called the
Schoolmen, principally flourished. The writers who preceded the
Christian era, possessed in an extraordinary degree the gift of
imagination and invention. But they had little to boast on the score
of arrangement, and discovered little skill in the strictness of an
accurate deduction. Meanwhile the Schoolmen had a surprising subtlety
in weaving the web of an argument, and arriving by a close deduction,
through a multitude of steps, to a sound and irresistible conclusion.
Our lawyers to a certain degree formed themselves on the discipline of
the Schoolmen. Nothing can be more forcibly contrasted, than the mode
of pleading among the ancients, and that which has characterised the
processes of the moderns. The pleadings of the ancients were praxises
of the art of oratorical persuasion; the pleadings of the moderns
sometimes, though rarely, deviate into oratory, but principally
consist in dextrous subtleties upon words, or a nice series of
deductions, the whole contexture of which is endeavoured to be woven
into one indissoluble substance. Several striking examples have been
preserved of the mode of pleading in the reign of Edward II, in which
the exceptions taken for the defendant, and the replies supporting the
mode of proceeding on behalf of the plaintiff, in no respect fall
short of the most admired shifts, quirks and subtleties of the great
lawyers of later times. [177]

It would be certainly wrong therefore to consider the legal phrase, to
"compass or imagine the death of the king," as meaning the same thing
as to "kill, or intend to kill" him. At all events we may take it for
granted, that to "compass" does not mean to accomplish; but rather to
"take in hand, to go about to effect." There is therefore no form of
words here forbidding to "kill the king." The phrase, to "imagine,"
does not appear less startling. What is, to a proverb, more lawless
than imagination?

  Evil into the mind of God or man
  May come and go, so unapproved, and leave
  No spot or blame behind.

What can be more tyrannical, than an inquisition into the sports and
freaks of fancy? What more unsusceptible of detection or evidence? How
many imperceptible shades of distinction between the guilt and
innocence that characterise them!--Meanwhile the force and propriety
of these terms will strikingly appear, if we refer them to the popular
ideas of witchcraft. Witches were understood to have the power of
destroying life, without the necessity of approaching the person whose
life was to be destroyed, or producing any consciousness in him of the
crime about to be perpetrated. One method was by exposing an image of
wax to the action of fire; while, in proportion as the image wasted
away, the life of the individual who was the object contrived against,
was undermined and destroyed. Another was by incantations and spells.
Either of these might fitly be called the "compassing or imagining the
death." Imagination is, beside this, the peculiar province of
witchcraft. And in these pretended hags the faculty is no longer
desultory and erratic. Conscious of their power, they are supposed to
have subjected it to system and discipline. They apply its secret and
trackless energy with an intentness and a vigour, which ordinary
mortals may in vain attempt to emulate in an application of the force
of inert matter, or of the different physical powers by means of which
such stupendous effects have often been produced.--How universal and
familiar then must we consider the ideas of witchcraft to have been
before language which properly describes the secret practices of such
persons, and is not appropriate to any other, could have been found to
insinuate itself into the structure of the most solemn act of our
legislature, that act which beyond all others was intended to narrow
or shut out the subtle and dangerous inroads of arbitrary power!


ZIITO.

Very extraordinary things are related of Ziito, a sorcerer, in the
court of Wenceslaus, king of Bohemia and afterwards emperor of Germany,
in the latter part of the fourteenth century. This is perhaps, all
things considered, the most wonderful specimen of magical power any
where to be found. It is gravely recorded by Dubravius, bishop of
Olmutz, in his History of Bohemia. It was publicly exhibited on
occasion of the marriage of Wenceslaus with Sophia, daughter of the
elector Palatine of Bavaria, before a vast assembled multitude.

The father-in-law of the king, well aware of the bridegroom's known
predilection for theatrical exhibitions and magical illusions, brought
with him to Prague, the capital of Wenceslaus, a whole waggon-load of
morrice-dancers and jugglers, who made their appearance among the
royal retinue. Meanwhile Ziito, the favourite magician of the king,
took his place obscurely among the ordinary spectators. He however
immediately arrested the attention of the strangers, being remarked
for his extraordinary deformity, and a mouth that stretched completely
from ear to ear. Ziito was for some time engaged in quietly observing
the tricks and sleights that were exhibited. At length, while the
chief magician of the elector Palatine was still busily employed in
shewing some of the most admired specimens of his art, the Bohemian,
indignant at what appeared to him the bungling exhibitions of his
brother-artist, came forward, and reproached him with the unskilfulness
of his performances. The two professors presently fell into warm
debate. Ziito, provoked at the insolence of his rival, made no more
ado but swallowed him whole before the multitude, attired as he was,
all but his shoes, which he objected to because they were dirty. He
then retired for a short while to a closet, and presently returned,
leading the magician along with him.

Having thus disposed of his rival, Ziito proceeded to exhibit the
wonders of his art. He shewed himself first in his proper shape, and
then in those of different persons successively, with countenances and
a stature totally dissimilar to his own; at one time splendidly
attired in robes of purple and silk, and then in the twinkling of an
eye in coarse linen and a clownish coat of frieze. He would proceed
along the field with a smooth and undulating motion without changing
the posture of a limb, for all the world as if he were carried along
in a ship. He would keep pace with the king's chariot, in a car drawn
by barn-door fowls. He also amused the king's guests as they sat at
table, by causing, when they stretched out their hands to the different
dishes, sometimes their hands to turn into the cloven feet of an ox,
and at other times into the hoofs of a horse. He would clap on them
the antlers of a deer, so that, when they put their heads out at
window to see some sight that was going by, they could by no means
draw them back again; while he in the mean time feasted on the savoury
cates that had been spread before them, at his leisure.

At one time he pretended to be in want of money, and to task his wits
to devise the means to procure it. On such an occasion he took up a
handful of grains of corn, and presently gave them the form and
appearance of thirty hogs well fatted for the market. He drove these
hogs to the residence of one Michael, a rich dealer, but who was
remarked for being penurious and thrifty in his bargains. He offered
them to Michael for whatever price he should judge reasonable. The
bargain was presently struck, Ziito at the same time warning the
purchaser, that he should on no account drive them to the river to
drink. Michael however paid no attention to this advice; and the hogs
no sooner arrived at the river, than they turned into grains of corn
as before. The dealer, greatly enraged at this trick, sought high and
low for the seller that he might be revenged on him. At length he
found him in a vintner's shop seemingly in a gloomy and absent frame
of mind, reposing himself, with his legs stretched out on a form. The
dealer called out to him, but he seemed not to hear. Finally he seized
Ziito by one foot, plucking at it with all his might. The foot came
away with the leg and thigh; and Ziito screamed out, apparently in
great agony. He seized Michael by the nape of the neck, and dragged
him before a judge. Here the two set up their separate complaints,
Michael for the fraud that had been committed on him, and Ziito for
the irreparable injury he had suffered in his person. From this
adventure came the proverb, frequent in the days of the historian,
speaking of a person who had made an improvident bargain, "He has made
just such a purchase as Michael did with his hogs."


TRANSMUTATION OF METALS.

Among the different pursuits, which engaged the curiosity of active
minds in these unenlightened ages, was that of the transmutation of
the more ordinary metals into gold and silver. This art, though not
properly of necromantic nature, was however elevated by its professors,
by means of an imaginary connection between it and astrology, and even
between it and an intercourse with invisible spirits. They believed,
that their investigations could not be successfully prosecuted but
under favourable aspects of the planets, and that it was even
indispensible to them to obtain supernatural aid.

In proportion as the pursuit of transmutation, and the search after
the elixir of immortality grew into vogue, the adepts became desirous
of investing them with the venerable garb of antiquity. They
endeavoured to carry up the study to the time of Solomon; and there
were not wanting some who imputed it to the first father of mankind.
They were desirous to track its footsteps in Ancient Egypt; and they
found a mythological representation of it in the expedition of Jason
after the golden fleece, and in the cauldron by which Medea restored
the father of Jason to his original youth. [178] But, as has already
been said, the first unquestionable mention of the subject is to be
referred to the time of Dioclesian. [179] From that period traces of
the studies of the alchemists from time to time regularly discover
themselves.

The study of chemistry and its supposed invaluable results was
assiduously cultivated by Geber and the Arabians.


ARTEPHIUS.

Artephius is one of the earliest names that occur among the students
who sought the philosopher's stone. Of him extraordinary things are
told. He lived about the year 1130, and wrote a book of the Art of
Prolonging Human Life, in which he professes to have already attained
the age of one thousand and twenty-five years. [180] He must by this
account have been born about one hundred years after our Saviour. He
professed to have visited the infernal regions, and there to have seen
Tantalus seated on a throne of gold. He is also said by some to be the
same person, whose life has been written by Philostratus under the
name of Apollonius of Tyana. [181] He wrote a book on the philosopher's
stone, which was published in Latin and French at Paris in the year
1612.


RAYMOND LULLI.

Among the European students of these interesting secrets a foremost
place is to be assigned to Raymond Lulli and Arnold of Villeneuve.

Lulli was undoubtedly a man endowed in a very eminent degree with the
powers of intellect. He was a native of the island of Majorca, and was
born in the year 1234. He is said to have passed his early years in
profligacy and dissipation, but to have been reclaimed by the accident
of falling in love with a young woman afflicted with a cancer. This
circumstance induced him to apply himself intently to the study of
chemistry and medicine, with a view to discover a cure for her
complaint, in which he succeeded. He afterwards entered into the
community of Franciscan friars.

Edward the First was one of the most extraordinary princes that ever
sat on a throne. He revived the study of the Roman civil law with such
success as to have merited the title of the English Justinian. He was
no less distinguished as the patron of arts and letters. He invited to
England Guido dalla Colonna, the author of the Troy Book, and Raymond
Lulli. This latter was believed in his time to have prosecuted his
studies with such success as to have discovered the _elixir vitae_,
by means of which he could keep off the assaults of old age, at least
for centuries, and the philosopher's stone. He is affirmed by these
means to have supplied to Edward the First six millions of money, to
enable him to carry on war against the Turks.

But he was not only indefatigable in the pursuit of natural science.
He was also seized with an invincible desire to convert the Mahometans
to the Christian faith. For this purpose he entered earnestly upon the
study of the Oriental languages. He endeavoured to prevail on different
princes of Europe to concur in his plan, and to erect colleges for the
purpose, but without success. He at length set out alone upon his
enterprise, but met with small encouragement. He penetrated into
Africa and Asia. He made few converts, and was with difficulty suffered
to depart, under a solemn injunction that he should not return. But
Lulli chose to obey God rather than man, and ventured a second time.
The Mahometans became exasperated with his obstinacy, and are said to
have stoned him to death at the age of eighty years. His body was
however transported to his native place; and miracles are reported to
have been worked at his tomb. [182]

Raymond Lulli is beside famous for what he was pleased to style his
Great Art. The ordinary accounts however that are given of this art
assume a style of burlesque, rather than of philosophy. He is said to
have boasted that by means of it he could enable any one to argue
logically on any subject for a whole day together, independently of
any previous study of the subject in debate. To the details of the
process Swift seems to have been indebted for one of the humorous
projects described by him in his voyage to Laputa. Lulli recommended
that certain general terms of logic, metaphysics, ethics or theology
should first be collected. These were to be inscribed separately upon
square pieces of parchment. They were then to be placed on a frame so
constructed that by turning a handle they might revolve freely, and
form endless combinations. One term would stand for a subject, and
another for a predicate. The student was then diligently to inspect
the different combinations that fortuitously arose, and exercising the
subtlety of his faculties to select such as he should find best
calculated for his purposes. He would thus carry on the process of his
debate; and an extraordinary felicity would occasionally arise,
suggesting the most ingenious hints, and leading on to the most
important discoveries. [183]--If a man with the eminent faculties
which Lulli otherwise appeared to have possessed really laid down the
rules of such an art, all he intended by it must have been to satirize
the gravity with which the learned doctors of his time carried on
their grave disputations in mood and figure, having regard only to the
severity of the rule by which they debated, and holding themselves
totally indifferent whether they made any real advances in the
discovery of truth.


ARNOLD OF VILLENEUVE.

Arnold of Villeneuve, who lived about the same time, was a man of
eminent attainments. He made a great proficiency in Greek, Hebrew, and
Arabic. He devoted himself in a high degree to astrology, and was so
confident in his art, as to venture to predict that the end of the
world would occur in a few years; but he lived to witness the
fallaciousness of his prophecy. He had much reputation as a physician.
He appears to have been a bold thinker. He maintained that deeds of
charity were of more avail than the sacrifice of the mass, and that no
one would be damned hereafter, but such as were proved to afford an
example of immoral conduct. Like all the men of these times who were
distinguished by the profoundness of their studies, he was accused of
magic. For this, or upon a charge of heresy, he was brought under the
prosecution of the inquisition. But he was alarmed by the fate of
Peter of Apono, and by recantation or some other mode of prudent
contrivance was fortunate enough to escape. He is one of the persons
to whom the writing of the book, _De Tribus Impostoribus_, Of the
Three Impostors (Moses, Jesus Christ and Mahomet) was imputed! [184]


ENGLISH LAWS RESPECTING TRANSMUTATION.

So great an alarm was conceived about this time respecting the art of
transmutation, that an act of parliament was passed in the fifth year
of Henry IV, 1404, which lord Coke states as the shortest of our
statutes, determining that the making of gold or silver shall be
deemed felony. This law is said to have resulted from the fear at that
time entertained by the houses of lords and commons, lest the
executive power, finding itself by these means enabled to increase the
revenue of the crown to any degree it pleased, should disdain to ask
aid from the legislature; and in consequence should degenerate into
tyranny and arbitrary power. [185]

George Ripley, of Ripley in the county of York, is mentioned, towards
the latter part of the fifteenth century, as having discovered the
philosopher's stone, and by its means contributed one hundred thousand
pounds to the knights of Rhodes, the better to enable them to carry on
their war against the Turks. [186]

About this time however the tide appears to have turned, and the alarm
respecting the multiplication of the precious metals so greatly to
have abated, that patents were issued in the thirty-fifth year of
Henry VI, for the encouragement of such as were disposed to seek the
universal medicine, and to endeavour the transmutation of inferior
metals into gold. [187]




REVIVAL OF LETTERS.


While these things were going on in Europe, the period was gradually
approaching, when the energies of the human mind were to loosen its
shackles, and its independence was ultimately to extinguish those
delusions and that superstition which had so long enslaved it.
Petrarch, born in the year 1304, was deeply impregnated with a passion
for classical lore, was smitten with the love of republican
institutions, and especially distinguished himself for an adoration of
Homer. Dante, a more sublime and original genius than Petrarch, was
his contemporary. About the same time Boccaccio in his Decamerone gave
at once to Italian prose that purity and grace, which none of his
successors in the career of literature have ever been able to excel.
And in our own island Chaucer with a daring hand redeemed his native
tongue from the disuse and ignominy into which it had fallen, and
poured out the immortal strains that the genuine lovers of the English
tongue have ever since perused with delight, while those who are
discouraged by its apparent crabbedness, have yet grown familiar with
his thoughts in the smoother and more modern versification of Dryden
and Pope. From that time the principles of true taste have been more
or less cultivated, while with equal career independence of thought
and an ardent spirit of discovery have continually proceeded, and made
a rapid advance towards the perfect day.

But the dawn of literature and intellectual freedom were still a long
time ere they produced their full effect. The remnant of the old woman
clung to the heart with a tenacious embrace. Three or four centuries
elapsed, while yet the belief in sorcery and witchcraft was alive in
certain classes of society. And then, as is apt to occur in such cases,
the expiring folly occasionally gave tokens of its existence with a
convulsive vehemence, and became only the more picturesque and
impressive through the strong contrast of lights and shadows that
attended its manifestations.


JOAN OF ARC.

One of the most memorable stories on record is that of Joan of Arc,
commonly called the Maid of Orleans. Henry the Fifth of England won
the decisive battle of Agincourt in the year 1415, and some time after
concluded a treaty with the reigning king of France, by which he was
recognised, in case of that king's death, as heir to the throne.
Henry V died in the year 1422, and Charles VI of France in less than
two months after. Henry VI was only nine months old at the time of his
father's death; but such was the deplorable state of France, that he
was in the same year proclaimed king in Paris, and for some years
seemed to have every prospect of a fortunate reign. John duke of
Bedford, the king's uncle, was declared regent of France: the son of
Charles VI was reduced to the last extremity; Orleans was the last
strong town in the heart of the kingdom which held out in his favour;
and that place seemed on the point to surrender to the conqueror.

In this fearful crisis appeared Joan of Arc, and in the most incredible
manner turned the whole tide of affairs. She was a servant in a poor
inn at Domremi, and was accustomed to perform the coarsest offices,
and in particular to ride the horses to a neighbouring stream to water.
Of course the situation of France and her hereditary king formed the
universal subject of conversation; and Joan became deeply impressed
with the lamentable state of her country and the misfortunes of her
king. By dint of perpetual meditation, and feeling in her breast the
promptings of energy and enterprise, she conceived the idea that she
was destined by heaven to be the deliverer of France. Agreeably to the
state of intellectual knowledge at that period, she persuaded herself
that she saw visions, and held communication with the saints. She had
conversations with St. Margaret, and St. Catherine of Fierbois. They
told her that she was commissioned by God to raise the siege of
Orleans, and to conduct Charles VII to his coronation at Rheims. St.
Catherine commanded her to demand a sword which was in her church at
Fierbois, which the Maid described by particular tokens, though she
had never seen it. She then presented herself to Baudricourt, governor
of the neighbouring town of Vaucouleurs, telling him her commission,
and requiring him to send her to the king at Chinon. Baudricourt at
first made light of her application; but her importunity and the
ardour she expressed at length excited him. He put on her a man's
attire, gave her arms, and sent her under an escort of two gentlemen
and their attendants to Chinon. Here she immediately addressed the
king in person, who had purposely hid himself behind his courtiers
that she might not know him. She then delivered her message, and
offered in the name of the Most High to raise the siege of Orleans,
and conduct king Charles to Rheims to be anointed. As a further
confirmation she is said to have revealed to the king before a few
select friends, a secret, which nothing but divine inspiration could
have discovered to her.

Desperate as was then the state of affairs, Charles and his ministers
immediately resolved to seize the occasion that offered, and put
forward Joan as an instrument to revive the prostrate courage of his
subjects. He had no sooner determined on this, than he pretended to
submit the truth of her mission to the most rigorous trial. He called
together an assembly of theologians and doctors, who rigorously
examined Joan, and pronounced in her favour. He referred the question
to the parliament of Poitiers; and they, who met persuaded that she
was an impostor, became convinced of her inspiration. She was mounted
on a high-bred steed, furnished with a consecrated banner, and marched,
escorted by a body of five thousand men, to the relief of Orleans. The
French, strongly convinced by so plain an interposition of heaven,
resumed the courage to which they had long been strangers. Such a
phenomenon was exactly suited to the superstition and credulity of the
age. The English were staggered with the rumours that every where went
before her, and struck with a degree of apprehension and terror that
they could not shake off. The garrison, informed of her approach, made
a sally on the other side of the town; and Joan and her convoy entered
without opposition. She displayed her standard in the market-place,
and was received as a celestial deliverer.

She appears to have been endowed with a prudence, not inferior to her
courage and spirit of enterprise. With great docility she caught the
hints of the commanders by whom she was surrounded; and, convinced of
her own want of experience and skill, delivered them to the forces as
the dictates of heaven. Thus the knowledge and discernment of the
generals were brought into play, at the same time that their
suggestions acquired new weight, when falling from the lips of the
heaven-instructed heroine. A second convoy arrived; the waggons and
troops passed between the redoubts of the English; while a dead
silence and astonishment reigned among the forces, so lately
enterprising and resistless. Joan now called on the garrison no longer
to stand upon the defensive, but boldly to attack the army of the
besiegers. She took one redoubt and then another. The English,
overwhelmed with amazement, scarcely dared to lift a hand against her.
Their veteran generals became spell-bound and powerless; and their
soldiers were driven before the prophetess like a flock of sheep. The
siege was raised.

Joan followed the English garrison to a fortified town which they
fixed on as their place of retreat. The siege lasted ten days; the
place was taken; and all the English within it made prisoners. The
late victorious forces now concentred themselves at Patay in the
Orleanois; Joan advanced to meet them. The battle lasted not a moment;
it was rather a flight than a combat; Fastolfe, one of the bravest of
our commanders, threw down his arms, and ran for his life; Talbot and
Scales, the other generals, were made prisoners. The siege of Orleans
was raised on the eighth of May, 1429; the battle of Patay was fought
on the tenth of the following month. Joan was at this time twenty-two
years of age.

This extraordinary turn having been given to the affairs of the
kingdom, Joan next insisted that the king should march to Rheims, in
order to his being crowned. Rheims lay in a direction expressly
through the midst of the enemies' garrisons. But every thing yielded
to the marvellous fortune that attended upon the heroine. Troyes
opened its gates; Chalons followed the example; Rheims sent a
deputation with the keys of the city, which met Charles on his march.
The proposed solemnity took place amidst the extacies and enthusiastic
shouts of his people. It was no sooner over, than Joan stept forward.
She said, she had now performed the whole of what God had commissioned
her to do; she was satisfied; she intreated the king to dismiss her to
the obscurity from which she had sprung.

The ministers and generals of France however found Joan too useful an
instrument, to be willing to part with her thus early; and she yielded
to their earnest expostulations. Under her guidance they assailed Laon,
Soissons, Chateau Thierry, Provins, and many other places, and took
them one after another. She threw herself into Compiegne, which was
besieged by the Duke of Burgundy in conjunction with certain English
commanders. The day after her arrival she headed a sally against the
enemy; twice she repelled them; but, finding their numbers increase
every moment with fresh reinforcements, she directed a retreat. Twice
she returned upon her pursuers, and made them recoil, the third time
she was less fortunate. She found herself alone, surrounded with the
enemy; and after having enacted prodigies of valour, she was compelled
to surrender a prisoner. This happened on the twenty-fifth of May,
1430.

It remained to be determined what should be the fate of this admirable
woman. Both friends and enemies agreed that her career had been
attended with a supernatural power. The French, who were so infinitely
indebted to her achievements, and who owed the sudden and glorious
reverse of their affairs to her alone, were convinced that she was
immediately commissioned by God, and vied with each other in reciting
the miraculous phenomena which marked every step in her progress. The
English, who saw all the victorious acquisitions of Henry V crumbling
from their grasp, were equally impressed with the manifest miracle,
but imputed all her good-fortune to a league with the prince of
darkness. They said that her boasted visions were so many delusions of
the devil. They determined to bring her to trial for the tremendous
crimes of sorcery and witchcraft. They believed that, if she were once
convicted and led out to execution, the prowess and valour which had
hitherto marked their progress would return to them, and that they
should obtain the same superiority over their disheartened foes. The
devil, who had hitherto been her constant ally, terrified at the
spectacle of the flames that consumed her, would instantly return to
the infernal regions, and leave the field open to English enterprise
and energy, and to the interposition of God and his saints.

An accusation was prepared against her, and all the solemnities of a
public trial were observed. But the proofs were so weak and
unsatisfactory, and Joan, though oppressed and treated with the utmost
severity, displayed so much acuteness and presence of mind, that the
court, not venturing to proceed to the last extremity, contented
themselves with sentencing her to perpetual imprisonment, and to be
allowed no other nourishment than bread and water for life. Before
they yielded to this mitigation of punishment, they caused her to sign
with her mark a recantation of her offences. She acknowledged that the
enthusiasm that had guided her was an illusion, and promised never
more to listen to its suggestions.

The hatred of her enemies however was not yet appeased. They
determined in some way to entrap her. They had clothed her in a female
garb; they insidiously laid in her way the habiliments of a man. The
fire smothered in the bosom of the maid, revived at the sight; she was
alone; she caught up the garments, and one by one adjusted them to her
person. Spies were set upon her to watch for this event; they burst
into the apartment. What she had done was construed into no less
offence than that of a relapsed heretic; there was no more pardon for
such confirmed delinquency; she was brought out to be burned alive in
the market-place of Rouen, and she died, embracing a crucifix, and in
her last moments calling upon the name of Jesus. A few days more than
twelve months, had elapsed between the period of her first captivity
and her execution.


ELEANOR COBHAM, DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER.

This was a period in which the ideas of witchcraft had caught fast
hold of the minds of mankind; and those accusations, which by the
enlightened part of the species would now be regarded as worthy only
of contempt, were then considered as charges of the most flatigious
[Errata: _read_ flagitious] nature. While John, duke of Bedford,
the eldest uncle of king Henry VI, was regent of France, Humphrey of
Gloucester, next brother to Bedford, was lord protector of the realm
of England. Though Henry was now nineteen years of age, yet, as he was
a prince of slender capacity, Humphrey still continued to discharge
the functions of sovereignty. He was eminently endowed with popular
qualities, and was a favourite with the majority of the nation. He had
however many enemies, one of the chief of whom was Henry Beaufort,
great-uncle to the king, and cardinal of Winchester. One of the means
employed by this prelate to undermine the power of Humphrey, consisted
in a charge of witchcraft brought against Eleanor Cobham, his wife.

This woman had probably yielded to the delusions, which artful persons,
who saw into the weakness of her character, sought to practise upon
her. She was the second wife of Humphrey, and he was suspected to have
indulged in undue familiarity with her, before he was a widower. His
present duchess was reported to have had recourse to witchcraft in the
first instance, by way of securing his wayward inclinations. The duke
of Bedford had died in 1435; and Humphrey now, in addition to the
actual exercise of the powers of sovereigny, was next heir to the
crown in case of the king's decease. This weak and licentious woman,
being now duchess of Gloucester, and wife to the lord protector,
directed her ambition to the higher title and prerogatives of a queen,
and by way of feeding her evil passions, called to her counsels
Margery Jourdain, commonly called the witch of Eye, Roger Bolingbroke,
an astrologer and supposed magician, Thomas Southwel, canon of St.
Stephen's, and one John Hume, or Hun, a priest. These persons
frequently met the duchess in secret cabal. They were accused of
calling up spirits from the infernal world; and they made an image of
wax, which they slowly consumed before a fire, expecting that, as the
image gradually wasted away, so the constitution and life of the poor
king would decay and finally perish.

Hume, or Hun, is supposed to have turned informer, and upon his
information several of these persons were taken into custody. After
previous examination, on the twenty-fifth of July, 1441, Bolingbroke
was placed upon a scaffold before the cross of St. Paul's, with a
chair curiously painted, which was supposed to be one of his
implements of necromancy, and dressed in mystical attire, and there,
before the archbishop of Canterbury, the cardinal of Winchester, and
several other bishops, made abjuration of all his unlawful arts.

A short time after, the duchess of Gloucester, having fled to the
sanctuary at Westminster, her case was referred to the same high
persons, and Bolingbroke was brought forth to give evidence against
her. She was of consequence committed to custody in the castle of
Leeds near Maidstone, to take her trial in the month of October. A
commission was directed to the lord treasurer, several noblemen, and
certain judges of both benches, to enquire into all manner of treasons,
sorceries, and other things that might be hurtful to the king's person,
and Bolingbroke and Southwel as principals, and the duchess of
Gloucester as accessory, were brought before them. Margery Jourdain
was arraigned at the same time; and she, as a witch and relapsed
heretic, was condemned to be burned in Smithfield. The duchess of
Gloucester was sentenced to do penance on three several days, walking
through the streets of London, with a lighted taper in her hand,
attended by the lord mayor, the sheriffs, and a select body of the
livery, and then to be banished for life to the isle of Man. Thomas
Southwel died in prison; and Bolingbroke was hanged at Tyburn on the
eighteenth of November.


RICHARD III.

An event occurred not very long after this, which deserves to be
mentioned, as being well calculated to shew how deep an impression
ideas of witchcraft had made on the public mind even in the gravest
affairs and the counsels of a nation. Richard duke of Gloucester,
afterwards Richard III, shortly before his usurpation of the crown in
1483, had recourse to this expedient for disarming the power of his
enemies, which he feared as an obstacle to his project. Being lord
protector, he came abruptly into the assembly of the council that he
had left but just before, and suddenly asked, what punishment they
deserved who should be found to have plotted against his life, being
the person, as nearest akin to the young king, intrusted in chief with
the affairs of the nation? And, a suitable answer being returned, he
said the persons he accused were the queen-dowager, and Jane Shore,
the favourite concubine of the late king, who by witchcraft and
forbidden arts had sought to destroy him. And, while he spoke, he laid
bare his left arm up to the elbow, which appeared shrivelled and
wasted in a pitiable manner. "To this condition," said he, "have these
abandoned women reduced me."--The historian adds, that it was well
known that his arm had been thus wasted from his birth.

In January 1484, the parliament met which recognised the title of
Richard, and pronounced the marriage of Edward IV null, and its issue
illegitimate. [188] The same parliament passed an act of attainder
against Henry earl of Richmond, afterwards Henry VII, the countess of
Richmond, his mother, and a great number of other persons, many of
them the most considerable adherents of the house of Lancaster. Among
these persons are enumerated Thomas Nandick and William Knivet,
necromancers. In the first parliament of Henry VII this attainder was
reversed, and Thomas Nandick of Cambridge, conjurer, is specially
nominated as an object of free pardon. [189]




SANGUINARY PROCEEDINGS AGAINST WITCHCRAFT.


I am now led to the most painful part of my subject, but which does
not the less constitute one of its integral members, and which, though
painful, is deeply instructive, and constitutes a most essential
branch in the science of human nature. Wherever I could, I have
endeavoured to render the topics which offered themselves to my
examination, entertaining. When men pretended to invert the known laws
of nature, "murdering impossibility; to make what cannot be, slight
work;" I have been willing to consider the whole as an ingenious
fiction, and merely serving as an example how far credulity could go
in setting aside the deductions of our reason, and the evidence of
sense. The artists in these cases did not fail to excite admiration,
and gain some sort of applause from their contemporaries, though still
with a tingling feeling that all was not exactly as it should be, and
with a confession that the professors were exercising unhallowed arts.
It was like what has been known of the art of acting; those who
employed it were caressed and made every where welcome, but were not
allowed the distinction of Christian burial.

But, particularly in the fifteenth century, things took a new turn. In
the dawn of the day of good sense, and when historical evidence at
length began to be weighed in the scales of judgment, men became less
careless of truth, and regarded prodigies and miracles with a different
temper. And, as it often happens, the crisis, the precise passage from
ill to better, shewed itself more calamitous, and more full of
enormities and atrocity, than the period when the understanding was
completely hood-winked, and men digested absurdities and impossibility
with as much ease as their every day food. They would not now forgive
the tampering with the axioms of eternal truth; they regarded cheat
and imposture with a very different eye; and they had recourse to the
stake and the faggot, for the purpose of proving that they would no
longer be trifled with. They treated the offenders as the most
atrocious of criminals, and thus, though by a very indirect and
circuitous method, led the way to the total dispersion of those clouds,
which hung, with most uneasy operation, on the human understanding.

The university of Paris in the year 1398 promulgated an edict, in
which they complained that the practice of witchcraft was become more
frequent and general than at any former period. [190]

A stratagem was at this time framed by the ecclesiastical persecutors,
of confounding together the crimes of heresy and witchcraft. The first
of these might seem to be enough in the days of bigotry and implicit
faith, to excite the horror of the vulgar; but the advocates of
religious uniformity held that they should be still more secure of
their object, if they could combine the sin of holding cheap the
authority of the recognised heads of Christian faith, with that of
men's enlisting under the banners of Satan, and becoming the avowed
and sworn vassals of his infernal empire. They accordingly seem to
have invented the ideas of a sabbath of witches, a numerous assembly
of persons who had cast off all sense of shame, and all regard for
those things which the rest of the human species held most sacred,
where the devil appeared among them in his most forbidding form, and,
by rites equally ridiculous and obscene, the persons present
acknowledged themselves his subjects. And, having invented this scene,
these cunning and mischievous persecutors found means, as we shall
presently see, of compelling their unfortunate victims to confess that
they had personally assisted at the ceremony, and performed all the
degrading offices which should consign them in the world to come to
everlasting fire.

While I express myself thus, I by no means intend to encourage the
idea that the ecclesiastical authorities of these times were generally
hypocrites. They fully partook of the narrowness of thought of the
period in which they lived. They believed that the sin of heretical
pravity was "as the sin of witchcraft;" [191] they regarded them alike
with horror, and were persuaded that there was a natural consent and
alliance between them. Fully impressed with this conception, they
employed means from which our genuine and undebauched nature revolts,
to extort from their deluded victims a confession of what their
examiners apprehended to be true; they asked them leading questions;
they suggested the answers they desired to receive; and led the
ignorant and friendless to imagine that, if these answers were adopted,
they might expect immediately to be relieved from insupportable
tortures. The delusion went round. These unhappy wretches, finding
themselves the objects of universal abhorrence, and the hatred of
mankind, at length many of them believed that they had entered into a
league with the devil, that they had been transported by him through
the air to an assembly of souls consigned to everlasting reprobation,
that they had bound themselves in acts of fealty to their infernal
taskmasters [Errata: _read_ taskmaster], and had received from
him in return the gift of performing superhuman and supernatural feats.
This is a tremendous state of degradation of what Milton called the
"the faultless proprieties of nature," [192] which cooler thinking and
more enlightened times would lead us to regard as impossible, but to
which the uncontradicted and authentic voice of history compels us to
subscribe.

The Albigenses and Waldenses were a set of men, who, in the
flourishing provinces of Languedoc, in the darkest ages, and when the
understandings of human creatures by a force not less memorable than
that of Procrustes were reduced to an uniform stature, shook off by
some strange and unaccountable freak, the chains that were universally
imposed, and arrived at a boldness of thinking similar to that which
Luther and Calvin after a lapse of centuries advocated with happier
auspices. With these manly and generous sentiments however they
combined a considerable portion of wild enthusiasm. They preached the
necessity of a community of goods, taught that it was necessary to
wear sandals, because sandals only had been worn by the apostles, and
devoted themselves to lives of rigorous abstinence and the most severe
self-denial.

The Catholic church knew no other way in those days of converting
heretics, but by fire and sword; and accordingly pope Innocent the
Third published a crusade against them. The inquisition was expressly
appointed in its origin to bring back these stray sheep into the flock
of Christ; and, to support this institution in its operations, Simon
Montfort marched a numerous army for the extermination of the
offenders. One hundred thousand are said to have perished. They
disappeared from the country which had witnessed their commencement,
and dispersed themselves in the vallies of Piedmont, in Artois, and in
various other places. This crusade occurred in the commencement of the
thirteenth century; and they do not again attract the notice of
history till the middle of the fifteenth.

Monstrelet, in his Chronicle, gives one of the earliest accounts of
the proceedings at this time instituted against these unfortunate
people, under the date of the year 1459. "In this year," says he, "in
the town of Arras, there occurred a miserable and inhuman scene, to
which, I know not why, was given the name of _Vaudoisie_. There
were taken up and imprisoned a number of considerable persons
inhabitants of this town, and others of a very inferior class. These
latter were so cruelly put to the torture, that they confessed, that
they had been transported by supernatural means to a solitary place
among woods, where the devil appeared before them in the form of a man,
though they saw not his face. He instructed them in the way in which
they should do his bidding, and exacted from them acts of homage and
obedience. He feasted them, and after, having put out the lights, they
proceeded to acts of the grossest licentiousness." These accounts,
according to Monstrelet, were dictated to the victims by their
tormentors; and they then added, under the same suggestion, the names
of divers lords, prelates, and governors of towns and bailliages, whom
they affirmed they had seen at these meetings, and who joined in the
same unholy ceremonies. The historian adds, that it cannot be
concealed that these accusations were brought by certain malicious
persons, either to gratify an ancient hatred, or to extort from the
rich sums of money, by means of which they might purchase their escape
from further prosecution. The persons apprehended were many of them
put to the torture so severely, and for so long a time, and were
tortured again and again, that they were obliged to confess what was
laid to their charge. Some however shewed so great constancy, that
they could by no means be induced to depart from the protestation of
their innocence. In fine, many of the poorer victims were inhumanly
burned; while the richer with great sums of money procured their
discharge, but at the same time were compelled to banish themselves to
distant places, remote from the scene of this cruel outrage.--Balduinus
of Artois gives a similar account, and adds that the sentence of the
judges was brought, by appeal under the revision of the parliament of
Paris, and was reversed by that judicature in the year 1491. [193]

I have not succeeded in tracing to my satisfaction from the original
authorities the dates of the following examples, and therefore shall
refer them to the periods assigned them in Hutchinson on Witchcraft.
The facts themselves rest for the most part on the most unquestionable
authority.

Innocent VIII published about the year 1484 a bull, in which he
affirms: "It has come to our ears, that numbers of both sexes do not
avoid to have intercourse with the infernal fiends, and that by their
sorceries they afflict both man and beast; they blight the
marriage-bed, destroy the births of women, and the increase of cattle;
they blast the corn on the ground, the grapes of the vineyard, the
fruits of the trees, and the grass and herbs of the field." For these
reasons he arms the inquisitors with apostolic power to "imprison,
convict and punish" all such as may be charged with these
offences.--The consequences of this edict were dreadful all over the
continent, particularly in Italy, Germany and France.

Alciatus, an eminent lawyer of this period, relates, that a certain
inquisitor came about this time into the vallies of the Alps, being
commissioned to enquire out and proceed against heretical women with
whom those parts were infested. He accordingly consigned more than one
hundred to the flames, every day, like a new holocaust, sacrificing
such persons to Vulcan, as, in the judgment of the historian, were
subjects demanding rather hellebore than fire; till at length the
peasantry of the vicinity rose in arms, and drove the merciless judge
out of the country. The culprits were accused of having dishonoured
the crucifix, and denying Christ for their God. They were asserted to
have solemnised after a detestable way the devil's sabbath, in which
the fiend appeared personally among them, and instructed them in the
ceremonies of his worship. Meanwhile a question was raised whether
they personally assisted on the occasion, or only saw the solemnities
in a vision, credible witnesses having sworn that they were at home in
their beds, at the very time that they were accused of having taken
part in these blasphemies. [194]

In 1515, more than five hundred persons are said to have suffered
capitally for the crime of witchcraft in the city of Geneva in the
course of three months. [195]

In 1524, one thousand persons were burned on this accusation in the
territory of Como, and one hundred per annum for several year after.
[196]

Danaeus commences his Dialogue of Witches with this observation. "Within
three months of the present time (1575) an almost infinite number of
witches have been taken, on whom the parliament of Paris has passed
judgment: and the same tribunal fails not to sit daily, as malefactors
accused of this crime are continually brought before them out of all
the provinces."

In the year 1595 Nicholas Remi, otherwise Remigius, printed a very
curious work, entitled Demonolatreia, in which he elaborately expounds
the principles of the compact into which the devil enters with his
mortal allies, and the modes of conduct specially observed by both
parties. He boasts that his exposition is founded on an exact
observation of the judicial proceedings which had taken place under
his eye in the duchy of Lorraine, where for the preceding fifteen
years nine hundred persons, more or less, had suffered the extreme
penalty of the law for the crime of sorcery. Most of the persons tried
seem to have been sufficiently communicative as to the different kinds
of menace and compulsion by which the devil had brought them into his
terms, and the various appearances he had exhibited, and feats he had
performed: but others, says the author, had, "by preserving an
obstinate silence, shewn themselves invincible to every species of
torture that could be inflicted on them."

But the most memorable record that remains to us on the subject of
witchcraft, is contained in an ample quarto volume, entitled A
Representation (_Tableau_) of the Ill Faith of Evil Spirits and
Demons, by Pierre De Lancre, Royal Counsellor in the Parliament of
Bordeaux. This man was appointed with one coadjutor, to enquire into
certain acts of sorcery, reported to have been committed in the
district of Labourt, near the foot of the Pyrenees; and his commission
bears date in May, 1609, and by consequence twelve months before the
death of Henry the Fourth.

The book is dedicated to M. de Silleri, chancellor of France; and in
the dedication the author observes, that formerly those who practised
sorcery were well known for persons of obscure station and narrow
intellect; but that now the sorcerers who confess their misdemeanours,
depose, that there are seen in the customary meetings held by such
persons a great number of individuals of quality, whom Satan keeps
veiled from ordinary gaze, and who are allowed to approach near to him,
while those of a poorer and more vulgar class are thrust back to the
furthest part of the assembly. The whole narrative assumes the form of
a regular warfare between Satan on the one side, and the royal
commissioners on the other.

At first the devil endeavoured to supply the accused with strength to
support the tortures by which it was sought to extort confession from
them, insomuch that, in an intermission of the torture, the wretches
declared that, presently falling asleep, they seemed to be in paradise,
and to enjoy the most beautiful visions. The commissioners however,
observing this, took care to grant them scarcely any remission, till
they had drawn from them, if possible, an ample confession. The devil
next proceeded to stop the mouths of the accused that they might not
confess. He leaped on their throats, and evidently caused an
obstruction of the organs of speech, so that in vain they endeavoured
to relieve themselves by disclosing all that was demanded of them.

The historian proceeds to say that, at these sacrilegious assemblings,
they now began to murmur against the devil, as wanting power to
relieve them in their extremity. The children, the daughters, and
other relatives of the victims reproached him, not scrupling to say,
"Out upon you! you promised that our mothers who were prisoners should
not die; and look how you have kept your word with us! They have been
burned, and are a heap of ashes." In answer to this charge the devil
stoutly affirmed, that their parents, who seemed to have suffered,
were not dead, but were safe in a foreign country, assuring the
malcontents that, if they called on them, they would receive an answer.
The children called accordingly, and by an infernal illusion an answer
came, exactly in the several voices of the deceased, declaring that
they were in a state of happiness and security.

Further to satisfy the complainers, the devil produced illusory fires,
and encouraged the dissatisfied to walk through them, assuring them
that the fires lighted by a judicial decree were as harmless and
inoffensive as these. The demon further threatened that he would cause
the prosecutors to be burned in their own fire, and even proceeded to
make them in semblance hover and alight on the branches of the
neighbouring trees. He further caused a swarm of toads to appear like
a garland to crown the heads of the sufferers, at which when in one
instance the bystanders threw stones to drive them away, one monstrous
black toad remained to the last uninjured, and finally mounted aloft,
and vanished from sight. De Lancre goes on to describe the ceremonies
of the sabbath of the devil; and a plate is inserted, presenting the
assembly in the midst of their solemnities. He describes in several
chapters the sort of contract entered into between the devil and the
sorcerers, the marks by which they may be known, the feast with which
the demon regaled them, their distorted and monstrous dance, the
copulation between the fiend and the witch, and its issue.--It is easy
to imagine with what sort of fairness the trials were conducted, when
such is the description the judge affords us of what passed at these
assemblies. Six hundred were burned under this prosecution.

The last chapter is devoted to an accurate account of what took place
at an _auto da fe_ in the month of November 1610 at Logrogno on
the Ebro in Spain, the victims being for the greater part the unhappy
wretches, who had escaped through the Pyrenees from the merciless
prosecution that had been exercised against them by the historian of
the whole.


SAVONAROLA.

Jerome Savonarola was one of the most remarkable men of his time, and
his fortunes are well adapted to illustrate the peculiarities of that
period. He was born in the year 1452 at Ferrara in Italy. He became a
Dominican Friar at Bologna without the knowledge of his parents in the
twenty-second year of his age. He was first employed by his superiors
in elucidating the principles of physics and metaphysics. But, after
having occupied some years in this way, he professed to take a lasting
leave of these subtleties, and to devote himself exclusively to the
study of the Scriptures. In no long time he became an eminent preacher,
by the elegance and purity of his style acquiring the applause of
hearers of taste, and by the unequalled fervour of his eloquence
securing the hearts of the many. It was soon obvious, that, by his
power gained in this mode, he could do any thing he pleased with the
people of Florence among whom he resided. Possessed of such an
ascendancy, he was not contented to be the spiritual guide of the
souls of men, but further devoted himself to the temporal prosperity
and grandeur of his country. The house of Medici was at this time
masters of the state, and the celebrated Lorenzo de Medici possessed
the administration of affairs. But the political maxims of Lorenzo
were in discord with those of our preacher. Lorenzo sought to
concentre all authority in the opulent few; but Savonarola, proceeding
on the model of the best times of ancient Rome, endeavoured to vest
the sovereign power in the hands of the people.

He had settled at Florence in the thirty-fourth year of his age, being
invited to become prior of the convent of St. Mark in that city: and
such was his popularity, that, four years after, Lorenzo on his
death-bed sent for Savonarola to administer to him spiritual
consolation. Meanwhile, so stern did this republican shew himself,
that he insisted on Lorenzo's renunciation of his absolute power,
before he would administer to him the sacrament and absolution: and
Lorenzo complied with these terms.

The prince being dead, Savonarola stepped immediately into the highest
authority. He reconstituted the state upon pure republican principles,
and enjoined four things especially in all his public preachings, the
fear of God, the love of the republic, oblivion of all past injuries,
and equal rights to all for the future.

But Savonarola was not contented with the delivery of Florence, where
he is said to have produced a total revolution of manners, from
libertinism to the most exemplary purity and integrity; he likewise
aspired to produce an equal effect on the entire of Italy.
Alexander VI, the most profligate of popes, then filled the chair at
Rome; and Savonarola thundered against him in the cathedral at
Florence the most fearful denunciations. The pope did not hesitate a
moment to proceed to extremities against the friar. He cited him to
Rome, under pain, if disobeyed, of excommunication to the priest, and
an interdict to the republic that harboured him. The Florentines
several times succeeded in causing the citation to be revoked, and,
making terms with the sovereign pontiff, Jerome again and again
suspending his preachings, which were however continued by other
friars, his colleagues and confederates. Savonarola meanwhile could
not long be silent; he resumed his philippics as fiercely as ever.

At this time faction raged strongly at Florence. Jerome had many
partisans; all the Dominicans, and the greater part of the populace.
But he had various enemies leagued against him; the adherents of the
house of Medici, those of the pope, the libertines, and all orders of
monks and friars except the Dominicans, The violence proceeded so far,
that the preacher was not unfrequently insulted in his pulpit, and the
cathedral echoed with the dissentions of the parties. At length a
conspiracy was organized against Savonarola; and, his adherents having
got the better, the friar did not dare to trust the punishment of his
enemies to the general assembly, where the question would have led to
a scene of warfare, but referred it to a more limited tribunal, and
finally proceeded to the infliction of death on its sole authority.

This extremity rendered his enemies more furious against him. The pope
directed absolution, the communion, and the rites of sepulture, to be
refused to his followers. He was now expelled from the cathedral at
Florence, and removed his preachings to the chapel of his convent,
which was enlarged in its accommodations to adapt itself to his
numerous auditors. In this interim a most extraordinary scene took
place. One Francis de Pouille offered himself to the trial of fire, in
favour of the validity of the excommunication of the pope against the
pretended inspiration and miracles of the prophet. He said he did not
doubt to perish in the experiment, but that he should have the
satisfaction of seeing Savonarola perish along with him. Dominic de
Pescia however and another Dominican presented themselves to the
flames instead of Jerome, alledging that he was reserved for higher
things. De Pouille at first declined the substitution, but was
afterwards prevailed on to submit. A vast fire was lighted in the
marketplace for the trial; and a low and narrow gallery of iron passed
over the middle, on which the challenger and the challenged were to
attempt to effect their passage. But a furious deluge of rain was said
to have occurred at the instant every thing was ready; the fire was
extinguished; and the trial for the present was thus rendered
impossible.

Savonarola in the earnestness of his preachings pretended to turn
prophet, and confidently to predict future events. He spoke of
Charles VIII of France as the Cyrus who should deliver Italy, and
subdue the nations before him; and even named the spring of the year
1498 as the period that should see all these things performed.

But it was not in prophecy alone that Savonarola laid claim to
supernatural aid. He described various contests that he had maintained
against a multitude of devils at once in his convent. They tormented
in different ways the friars of St. Mark, but ever shrank with awe
from his personal interposition. They attempted to call upon him by
name; but the spirit of God overruled them, so that they could never
pronounce his name aright, but still misplaced syllables and letters
in a ludicrous fashion. They uttered terrific threatenings against him,
but immediately after shrank away with fear, awed by the holy words
and warnings which he denounced against them. Savonarola besides
undertook to expel them by night, by sprinkling holy water, and the
singing of hymns in a solemn chorus. While however he was engaged in
these sacred offices, and pacing the cloister of his convent, the
devils would arrest his steps, and suddenly render the air before him
so thick, that it was impossible for him to advance further. On
another occasion one of his colleagues assured Francis Picus of
Mirandola, the writer of his Life, that he had himself seen the Holy
Ghost in the form of a dove more than once, sitting on Savonarola's
shoulder, fluttering his feathers, which were sprinkled with silver
and gold, and, putting his beak to his ear, whispering to him his
divine suggestions. The prior besides relates in a book of his own
composition at great length a dialogue that he held with the devil,
appearing like, and having been mistaken by the writer for, a hermit.

The life of Savonarola however came to a speedy and tragical close.
The multitude, who are always fickle in their impulses, conceiving an
unfavourable impression in consequence of his personally declining the
trial by fire, turned against him. The same evening they besieged the
convent where he resided, and in which he had taken refuge. The
signory, seeing the urgency of the case, sent to the brotherhood,
commanding them to surrender the prior, and the two Dominicans who had
presented themselves in his stead to the trial by fire. The pope sent
two judges to try them on the spot. They were presently put to the
torture. Savonarola, who we are told was of a delicate habit of body,
speedily confessed and expressed contrition for what he had done. But
no sooner was he delivered from the strappado, than he retracted all
that he had before confessed. The experiment was repeated several
times, and always with the same success.

At length he and the other two were adjudged to perish in the flames.
This sentence was no sooner pronounced than Savonarola resumed all the
constancy of a martyr. He advanced to the place of execution with a
steady pace and a serene countenance, and in the midst of the flames
resignedly commended his soul into the hands of his maker. His
adherents regarded him as a witness to the truth, and piously
collected his relics; but his judges, to counteract this defiance of
authority, commanded his remains and his ashes to be cast into the
river. [197]


TRITHEMIUS.

A name that has in some way become famous in the annals of magic, is
that of John Trithemius, abbot of Spanheim, or Sponheim, in the circle
of the Upper Rhine. He was born in the year 1462. He early
distinguished himself by his devotion to literature; insomuch that,
according to the common chronology, he was chosen in the year 1482,
being about twenty years of age, abbot of the Benedictine monastery of
St. Martin at Spanheim. He has written a great number of works, and
has left some memorials of his life. Learning was at a low ebb when he
was chosen to this dignity. The library of the convent consisted of
little more than forty volumes. But, shortly after, under his
superintendence it amounted to many hundreds. He insisted upon his
monks diligently employing themselves in the multiplication of
manuscripts. The monks, who had hitherto spent their days in luxurious
idleness, were greatly dissatisfied with this revolution, and led
their abbot a very uneasy life. He was in consequence removed to
preside over the abbey of St. Jacques in Wurtzburg in 1506, where he
died in tranquillity and peace in 1516.

Trithemius has been accused of necromancy and a commerce with demons.
The principal ground of this accusation lies in a story that has been
told of his intercourse with the emperor Maximilian. Maximilian's
first wife was Mary of Burgundy, whom he lost in the prime of her life.
The emperor was inconsolable upon the occasion; and Trithemius, who
was called in as singularly qualified to comfort him, having tried all
other expedients in vain, at length told Maximilian that he would
undertake to place his late consort before him precisely in the state
in which she had lived. After suitable preparations, Mary of Burgundy
accordingly appeared. The emperor was struck with astonishment. He
found the figure before him in all respects like the consort he had
lost. At length he exclaimed, "There is one mark by which I shall
infallibly know whether this is the same person. Mary, my wife, had a
wart in the nape of her neck, to the existence of which no one was
privy but myself." He examined, and found the wart there, in all
respects as it had been during her life. The story goes on to say,
that Maximilian was so disgusted and shocked with what he saw, that he
banished Trithemius his presence for ever.

This tale has been discredited, partly on the score of the period of
the death of Mary of Burgundy, which happened in 1481, when Trithemius
was only nineteen years of age. He himself expressly disclaims all
imputation of sorcery. One ground of the charge has been placed upon
the existence of a work of his, entitled Steganographia, or the art,
by means of a secret writing, of communicating our thoughts to a
person absent. He says however, that in this work he had merely used
the language of magic, without in any degree having had recourse to
their modes of proceeding. Trithemius appears to have been the first
writer who has made mention of the extraordinary feats of John Faust
of Wittenburg, and that in a way that shews he considered these
enchantments as the work of a supernatural power. [198]


LUTHER.

It is particularly proper to introduce some mention of Luther in this
place; not that he is in any way implicated in the question of
necromancy, but that there are passages in his writings in which he
talks of the devil in what we should now think a very extraordinary
way. And it is curious, and not a little instructive, to see how a
person of so masculine an intellect, and who in many respects so far
outran the illumination of his age, was accustomed to judge respecting
the intercourse of mortals with the inhabitants of the infernal world.
Luther was born in the year 1483.

It appears from his Treatise on the Abuses attendant on Private Masses,
that he had a conference with the devil on the subject. He says, that
this supernatural personage caused him by his visits "many bitter
nights and much restless and wearisome repose." Once in particular he
came to Luther, "in the dead of the night, when he was just awaked out
of sleep. The devil," he goes on to say, "knows well how to construct
his arguments, and to urge them with the skill of a master. He
delivers himself with a grave, and yet a shrill voice. Nor does he use
circumlocutions, and beat about the bush, but excels in forcible
statements and quick rejoinders. I no longer wonder," he adds, "that
the persons whom he assails in this way, are occasionally found dead
in their beds. He is able to compress and throttle, and more than once
he has so assaulted me and driven my soul into a corner, that I felt
as if the next moment it must leave my body. I am of opinion that
Gesner and Oecolampadius and others in that manner came by their
deaths. The devil's manner of opening a debate is pleasant enough; but
he urges things so peremptorily, that the respondent in a short time
knows not how to acquit himself." [199] He elsewhere says, "The
reasons why the sacramentarians understood so little of the Scriptures,
is that they do not encounter the true opponent, that is, the devil,
who presently drives one up in a corner, and thus makes one perceive
the just interpretation. For my part I am thoroughly acquainted with
him, and have eaten a bushel of salt with him. He sleeps with me more
frequently, and lies nearer to me in bed, than my own wife does." [200]


CORNELIUS AGRIPPA.

Henry Cornelius Agrippa was born in the year 1486. He was one of the
most celebrated men of his time. His talents were remarkably great;
and he had a surprising facility in the acquisition of languages. He
is spoken of with the highest commendations by Trithemius, Erasmus,
Melancthon, and others, the greatest men of his times. But he was a
man of the most violent passions, and of great instability of temper.
He was of consequence exposed to memorable vicissitudes. He had great
reputation as an astrologer, and was assiduous in the cultivation of
chemistry. He had the reputation of possessing the philosopher's stone,
and was incessantly experiencing the privations of poverty. He was
subject to great persecutions, and was repeatedly imprisoned. He
received invitations at the same time from Henry VIII, from the
chancellor of the emperor, from a distinguished Italian marquis, and
from Margaret of Austria, governess of the Low Countries. He made his
election in favour of the last, and could find no way so obvious of
showing his gratitude for her patronage, as composing an elaborate
treatise on the Superiority of the Female Sex, which he dedicated to
her. Shortly after, he produced a work not less remarkable, to
demonstrate the Vanity and Emptiness of Scientifical Acquirements.
Margaret of Austria being dead, he was subsequently appointed physician
to Louisa of Savoy, mother to Francis I. This lady however having
assigned him a task disagreeable to his inclination, a calculation
according to the rules of astrology, he made no scruple of turning
against her, and affirming that he should henceforth hold her for a
cruel and perfidious Jezebel. After a life of storms and perpetual
vicissitude, he died in 1534, aged 48 years.

He enters however into the work I am writing, principally on account
of the extraordinary stories that have been told of him on the subject
of magic. He says of himself, in his Treatise on the Vanity of
Sciences, "Being then a very young man, I wrote in three books of a
considerable size Disquisitions concerning Magic."

The first of the stories I am about to relate is chiefly interesting,
inasmuch as it is connected with the history of one of the most
illustrious ornaments of our early English poetry, Henry Howard earl
of Surrey, who suffered death at the close of the reign of King
Henry VIII. The earl of Surrey, we are told, became acquainted with
Cornelius Agrippa at the court of John George elector of Saxony. On
this occasion were present, beside the English nobleman, Erasmus, and
many other persons eminent in the republic of letters. These persons
shewed themselves enamoured of the reports that had been spread of
Agrippa, and desired him before the elector to exhibit something
memorable. One intreated him to call up Plautus, and shew him as he
appeared in garb and countenance, when he ground corn in the mill.
Another before all things desired to see Ovid. But Erasmus earnestly
requested to behold Tully in the act of delivering his oration for
Roscius. This proposal carried the most votes. And, after marshalling
the concourse of spectators, Tully appeared, at the command of Agrippa,
and from the rostrum pronounced the oration, precisely in the words in
which it has been handed down to us, "with such astonishing animation,
so fervent an exaltation of spirit, and such soul-stirring gestures,
that all the persons present were ready, like the Romans of old, to
pronounce his client innocent of every charge that had been brought
against him." The story adds, that, when sir Thomas More was at the
same place, Agrippa shewed him the whole destruction of Troy in a
dream. To Thomas Lord Cromwel he exhibited in a perspective glass King
Henry VIII and all his lords hunting in his forest at Windsor. To
Charles V he shewed David, Solomon, Gideon, and the rest, with the
Nine Worthies, in their habits and similitude as they had lived.

Lord Surrey, in the mean time having gotten into familiarity with
Agrippa, requested him by the way side as they travelled, to set
before him his mistress, the fair Geraldine, shewing at the same time
what she did, and with whom she talked. Agrippa accordingly exhibited
his magic glass, in which the noble poet saw this beautiful dame, sick,
weeping upon her bed, and inconsolable for the absence of her
admirer.--It is now known, that the sole authority for this tale is
Thomas Nash, the dramatist, in his Adventures of Jack Wilton, printed
in the year 1593.

Paulus Jovius relates that Agrippa always kept a devil attendant upon
him, who accompanied him in all his travels in the shape of a black
dog. When he lay on his death-bed, he was earnestly exhorted to repent
of his sins. Being in consequence struck with a deep contrition, he
took hold of the dog, and removed from him a collar studded with nails,
which formed a necromantic inscription, at the same time saying to him,
"Begone, wretched animal, which hast been the cause of my entire
destruction!"--It is added, that the dog immediately ran away, and
plunged itself in the river Soane, after which it was seen no more.
[201] It is further related of Agrippa, as of many other magicians,
that he was in the habit, when he regaled himself at an inn, of paying
his bill in counterfeit money, which at the time of payment appeared
of sterling value, but in a few days after became pieces of horn and
worthless shells. [202]

But the most extraordinary story of Agrippa is told by Delrio, and is
as follows. Agrippa had occasion one time to be absent for a few days
from his residence at Louvain. During his absence he intrusted his
wife with the key of his Museum, but with an earnest injunction that
no one on any account should be allowed to enter. Agrippa happened at
that time to have a boarder in his house, a young fellow of insatiable
curiosity, who would never give over importuning his hostess, till at
length he obtained from her the forbidden key. The first thing in the
Museum that attracted his attention, was a book of spells and
incantations. He spread this book upon a desk, and, thinking no harm,
began to read aloud. He had not long continued this occupation, when a
knock was heard at the door of the chamber. The youth took no notice,
but continued reading. Presently followed a second knock, which
somewhat alarmed the reader. The space of a minute having elapsed, and
no answer made, the door was opened, and a demon entered. "For what
purpose am I called?" said the stranger sternly. "What is it you
demand to have done?" The youth was seized with the greatest alarm,
and struck speechless. The demon advanced towards him, seized him by
the throat, and strangled him, indignant that his presence should thus
be invoked from pure thoughtlessness and presumption.

At the expected time Agrippa came home, and to his great surprise
found a number of devils capering and playing strange antics about,
and on the roof of his house. By his art he caused them to desist from
their sport, and with authority demanded what was the cause of this
novel appearance. The chief of them answered. He told how they had
been invoked, and insulted, and what revenge they had taken. Agrippa
became exceedingly alarmed for the consequences to himself of this
unfortunate adventure. He ordered the demon without loss of time to
reanimate the body of his victim, then to go forth, and to walk the
boarder three or four times up and down the market-place in the sight
of the people. The infernal spirit did as he was ordered, shewed the
student publicly alive, and having done this, suffered the body to
fall down, the marks of conscious existence being plainly no more. For
a time it was thought that the student had been killed by a sudden
attack of disease. But, presently after, the marks of strangulation
were plainly discerned, and the truth came out. Agrippa was then
obliged suddenly to withdraw himself, and to take up his residence in
a distant province. [203]

Wierus in his well known book, _De Praestigiis Demonum_, informs
us that he had lived for years in daily attendance on Cornelius
Agrippa, and that the black dog respecting which such strange surmises
had been circulated, was a perfectly innocent animal that he had often
led in a string. He adds, that the sole foundation for the story lay
in the fact, that Agrippa had been much attached to the dog, which he
was accustomed to permit to eat off the table with its master, and
even to lie of nights in his bed. He further remarks, that Agrippa was
accustomed often not to go out of his room for a week together, and
that people accordingly wondered that he could have such accurate
information of what was going on in all parts of the world, and would
have it that his intelligence was communicated to him by his dog. He
subjoins however, that Agrippa had in fact correspondents in every
quarter of the globe, and received letters from them daily, and that
this was the real source of his extraordinary intelligence. [204]

Naudé, in his Apology for Great Men accused of Magic, mentions, that
Agrippa composed a book of the Rules and Precepts of the Art of Magic,
and that, if such a work could entitle a man to the character of a
magician, Agrippa indeed well deserved it. But he gives it as his
opinion that this was the only ground for fastening the imputation on
this illustrious character.

Without believing however any of the tales of the magic practices of
Cornelius Agrippa, and even perhaps without supposing that he
seriously pretended to such arts, we are here presented with a
striking picture of the temper and credulity of the times in which he
lived. We plainly see from the contemporary evidence of Wierus, that
such things were believed of him by his neighbours; and at that period
it was sufficiently common for any man of deep study, of recluse
habits, and a certain sententious and magisterial air to undergo these
imputations. It is more than probable that Agrippa was willing by a
general silence and mystery to give encouragement to the wonder of the
vulgar mind. He was flattered by the terror and awe which his
appearance inspired. He did not wish to come down to the ordinary
level. And if to this we add his pursuits of alchemy and astrology,
with the formidable and various apparatus supposed to be required in
these pursuits, we shall no longer wonder at the results which
followed. He loved to wander on the brink of danger, and was contented
to take his chance of being molested, rather than not possess that
ascendancy over the ordinary race of mankind which was evidently
gratifying to his vanity.


FAUSTUS.

Next in respect of time to Cornelius Agrippa comes the celebrated Dr.
Faustus. Little in point of fact is known respecting this eminent
personage in the annals of necromancy. His pretended history does not
seem to have been written till about the year 1587, perhaps half a
century after his death. This work is apparently in its principal
features altogether fictitious. We have no reason however to deny the
early statements as to his life. He is asserted by Camerarius and
Wierus to have been born at Cundling near Cracow in the kingdom of
Poland, and is understood to have passed the principal part of his
life at the university of Wittenberg. He was probably well known to
Cornelius Agrippa and Paracelsus. Melancthon mentions him in his
Letters; and Conrad Gessner refers to him as a contemporary. The
author of his Life cites the opinions entertained respecting him by
Luther. Philip Camerarius speaks of him in his Horae Subsecivae as a
celebrated name among magicians, apparently without reference to the
Life that has come down to us; [205] and Wierus does the same thing.
[206] He was probably nothing more than an accomplished juggler, who
appears to have practised his art with great success in several towns
of Germany. He was also no doubt a pretender to necromancy.

On this basis the well known History of his Life has been built. The
author has with great art expanded very slender materials, and
rendered his work in a striking degree a code and receptacle of all
the most approved ideas respecting necromancy and a profane and
sacrilegious dealing with the devil. He has woven into it with much
skill the pretended arts of the sorcerers, and has transcribed or
closely imitated the stories that have been handed down to us of many
of the extraordinary feats they were said to have performed. It is
therefore suitable to our purpose to dwell at some length upon the
successive features of this history.

The life has been said to have been originally written in Spain by
Franciscus Schottus of Toledo, in the Latin language. [207] But this
biographical work is assigned to the date of 1594, previously to which
the Life is known to have existed in German. It is improbable that a
Spanish writer should have chosen a German for the hero of his romance,
whereas nothing can be more natural than for a German to have conceived
the idea of giving fame and notoriety to his countryman. The mistake
seems to be the same, though for an opposite reason, as that which
appears to have been made in representing the Gil Blas of Le Sage as a
translation.

The biographical account professes to have been begun by Faustus
himself, though written in the third person, and to have been
continued by Wagner, his confidential servant, to whom the doctor is
affirmed to have bequeathed his memoirs, letters and manuscripts,
together with his house and its furniture.

Faustus then, according to his history, was the son of a peasant,
residing on the banks of the Roda in the duchy of Weimar, and was
early adopted by an uncle, dwelling in the city of Wittenberg, who had
no children. Here he was sent to college, and was soon distinguished
by the greatness of his talents, and the rapid progress he made in
every species of learning that was put before him. He was destined by
his relative to the profession of theology. But singularly enough,
considering that he is represented as furnishing materials for his
own Memoirs, he is said ungraciously to have set at nought his uncle's
pious intentions by deriding God's word, and thus to have resembled
Cain, Reuben and Absalom, who, having sprung from godly parents,
afflicted their fathers' hearts by their apostasy. He went through his
examinations with applause, and carried off all the first prizes among
sixteen competitors. He therefore obtained the degree of doctor in
divinity; but his success only made him the more proud and headstrong.
He disdained his theological eminence, and sighed for distinction as a
man of the world. He took his degree as a doctor of medicine, and
aspired to celebrity as a practitioner of physic. About the same time
he fell in with certain contemporaries, of tastes similar to his own,
and associated with them in the study of Chaldean, Greek and Arabic
science, of strange incantations and supernatural influences, in short,
of all the arts of a sorcerer.

Having made such progress as he could by dint of study and intense
application, he at length resolved to prosecute his purposes still
further by actually raising the devil. He happened one evening to walk
in a thick, dark wood, within a short distance from Wittenberg, when
it occurred to him that that was a fit place for executing his design.
He stopped at a solitary spot where four roads met, and made use of
his wand to mark out a large circle, and then two small ones within
the larger. In one of these he fixed himself, appropriating the other
for the use of his expected visitor. He went over the precise range of
charms and incantations, omitting nothing. It was now dark night
between the ninth and tenth hour. The devil manifested himself by the
usual signs of his appearance. "Wherefore am I called?" said he, "and
what is it that you demand?" "I require," rejoined Faustus, "that you
should sedulously attend upon me, answer my enquiries, and fulfil my
behests."

Immediately upon Faustus pronouncing these words, there followed a
tumult over head, as if heaven and earth were coming together. The
trees in their topmost branches bended to their very roots. It seemed
as if the whole forest were peopled with devils, making a crash like a
thousand waggons, hurrying to the right and the left, before and
behind, in every possible direction, with thunder and lightning, and
the continual discharge of great cannon. Hell appeared to have emptied
itself, to have furnished the din. There succeeded the most charming
music from all sorts of instruments, and sounds of hilarity and
dancing. Next came a report as of a tournament, and the clashing of
innumerable lances. This lasted so long, that Faustus was many times
about to rush out of the circle in which he had inclosed himself, and
to abandon his preparations. His courage and resolution however got
the better; and he remained immoveable. He pursued his incantations
without intermission. Then came to the very edge of the circle a
griffin first, and next a dragon, which in the midst of his
enchantments grinned at him horribly with his teeth, but finally fell
down at his feet, and extended his length to many a rood. Faustus
persisted. Then succeeded a sort of fireworks, a pillar of fire, and a
man on fire at the top, who leaped down; and there immediately
appeared a number of globes here and there red-hot, while the man on
fire went and came to every part of the circle for a quarter of an
hour. At length the devil came forward in the shape of a grey monk,
and asked Faustus what he wanted. Faustus adjourned their further
conference, and appointed the devil to come to him at his lodgings.

He in the mean time busied himself in the necessary preparations. He
entered his study at the appointed time, and found the devil waiting
for him. Faustus told him that he had prepared certain articles, to
which it was necessary that the demon should fully accord,--that he
should attend him at all times, when required, for all the days of his
life, that he should bring him every thing he wanted, that he should
come to him in any shape that Faustus required, or be invisible, and
Faustus should be invisible too, whenever he desired it, that he
should deny him nothing, and answer him with perfect veracity to every
thing he demanded. To some of these requisitions the spirit could not
consent, without authority from his master, the chief of devils. At
length all these concessions were adjusted. The devil on his part also
prescribed his conditions. That Faustus should abjure the Christian
religion and all reverence for the supreme God; that he should enjoy
the entire command of his attendant demon for a certain term of years,
and that at the end of that period the devil should dispose of him
body and soul at his pleasure [the term was fixed for twenty-four
years]; that he should at all times stedfastly refuse to listen to any
one who should desire to convert him, or convince him of the error of
his ways, and lead him to repentance; that Faustus should draw up a
writing containing these particulars, and sign it with his blood, that
he should deliver this writing to the devil, and keep a duplicate of
it for himself, that so there might be no misunderstanding. It was
further appointed by Faustus that the devil should usually attend him
in the habit of cordelier, with a pleasing countenance and an
insinuating demeanour. Faustus also asked the devil his name, who
answered that he was usually called Mephostophiles (perhaps more
accurately Nephostophiles, a lover of clouds).

Previously to this deplorable transaction, in which Faustus sold
himself, soul and body, to the devil, he had consumed his inheritance,
and was reduced to great poverty. But he was now no longer subjected
to any straits. The establishments of the prince of Chutz, the duke of
Bavaria, and the archbishop of Saltzburgh were daily put under
contribution for his more convenient supply. By the diligence of
Mephostophiles provisions of all kinds continually flew in at his
windows; and the choicest wines were perpetually found at his board to
the annoyance and discredit of the cellarers and butlers of these
eminent personages, who were extremely blamed for defalcations in
which they had no share. He also brought him a monthly supply of money,
sufficient for the support of his establishment. Besides, he supplied
him with a succession of mistresses, such as his heart desired, which
were in truth nothing but devils disguised under the semblance of
beautiful women. He further gave to Faustus a book, in which were
amply detailed the processes of sorcery and witchcraft, by means of
which the doctor could obtain whatever he desired.

One of the earliest indulgences which Faustus proposed to himself from
the command he possessed over his servant-demon, was the gratification
of his curiosity in surveying the various nations of the world.
Accordingly Mephostophiles converted himself into a horse, with two
hunches on his back like a dromedary, between which he conveyed
Faustus through the air where-ever he desired. They consumed fifteen
months in their travels. Among the countries they visited the history
mentions Pannonia, Austria, Germany, Bohemia, Silesia, Saxony, Misnia,
Thuringia, Franconia, Suabia, Bavaria, Lithuania, Livonia, Prussia,
Muscovy, Friseland, Holland, Westphalia, Zealand, Brabant, Flanders,
France, Spain, Italy, Poland, and Hungary; and afterwards Turkey,
Egypt, England, Sweden, Denmark, India, Africa and Persia. In most of
these countries Mephostophiles points out to his fellow-traveller
their principal curiosities and antiquities. In Rome they sojourned
three days and three nights, and, being themselves invisible, visited
the residence of the pope and the other principal palaces.

At Constantinople Faustus visited the emperor of the Turks, assuming
to himself the figure of the prophet Mahomet. His approach was
preceded by a splendid illumination, not less than that of the sun in
all his glory. He said to the emperor, "Happy art thou, oh sultan, who
art found worthy to be visited by the great prophet." And the emperor
in return fell prostrate before him, thanking Mahomet for his
condescension in this visit. The doctor also entered the seraglio,
where he remained six days under the same figure, the building and its
gardens being all the time environed with a thick darkness, so that no
one, not the emperor himself, dared to enter. At the end of this time
the doctor, still under the figure of Mahomet, was publicly seen,
ascending, as it seemed, to heaven. The sultan afterwards enquired of
the women of his seraglio what had occurred to them during the period
of the darkness; and they answered, that the God Mahomet had been with
them, that he had enjoyed them corporeally, and had told them that
from his seed should arise a great people, capable of irresistible
exploits.

Faustus had conceived a plan of making his way into the terrestrial
paradise, without awakening suspicion in his demon-conductor. For this
purpose he ordered him to ascend the highest mountains of Asia. At
length they came so near, that they saw the angel with the flaming
sword forbidding approach to the garden. Faustus, perceiving this,
asked Mephostophiles what it meant. His conductor told him, but added
that it was in vain for them, or any one but the angels of the Lord,
to think of entering within.

Having gratified his curiosity in other ways, Faustus was seized with
a vehement desire to visit the infernal regions. He proposed the
question to Mephostophiles, who told him that this was a matter out of
his department, and that on that journey he could have no other
conductor than Beelzebub. Accordingly, every thing being previously
arranged, one day at midnight Beelzebub appeared, being already
equipped with a saddle made of dead men's bones. Faustus speedily
mounted. They in a short time came to an abyss, and encountered a
multitude of enormous serpents; but a bear with wings came to their
aid, and drove the serpents away. A flying bull next came with a
hideous roar, so fierce that Beelzebub appeared to give way, and
Faustus tumbled at once heels-over-head into the pit. After having
fallen to a considerable depth, two dragons with a chariot came to his
aid, and an ape helped him to get into the vehicle. Presently however
came on a storm with thunder and lightning, so dreadful that the
doctor was thrown out, and sunk in a tempestuous sea to a vast depth.
He contrived however to lay hold of a rock, and here to secure himself
a footing. He looked down, and perceived a great gulph, in which lay
floating many of the vulgar, and not a few emperors, kings, princes,
and such as had been mighty lords. Faustus with a sudden impulse cast
himself into the midst of the flames with which they were surrounded,
with the desire to snatch one of the damned souls from the pit. But,
just as he thought he had caught him by the hand, the miserable wretch
slided from between his fingers, and sank again.

At length the doctor became wholly exhausted with the fatigue he had
undergone, with the smoke and the fog, with the stifling, sulphureous
air, with the tempestuous blasts, with the alternate extremes of heat
and cold, and with the clamours, the lamentations, the agonies, and
the howlings of the damned everywhere around him,--when, just in the
nick of time, Beelzebub appeared to him again, and invited him once
more to ascend the saddle, which he had occupied during his infernal
journey. Here he fell asleep, and, when he awoke, found himself in his
own bed in his house. He then set himself seriously to reflect on what
had passed. At one time he believed that he had been really in hell,
and had witnessed all its secrets. At another he became persuaded that
he had been subject to an illusion only, and that the devil had led
him through an imaginary scene, which was truly the case; for the
devil had taken care not to shew him the real hell, fearing that it
might have caused too great a terror, and have induced him to repent
him of his misdeeds perhaps before it was too late.

It so happened that, once upon a time, the emperor Charles V was at
Inspruck, at a time when Faustus also resided there. His courtiers
informed the emperor that Faustus was in the town, and Charles
expressed a desire to see him. He was introduced. Charles asked him
whether he could really perform such wondrous feats as were reported
of him. Faustus modestly replied, inviting the emperor to make trial
of his skill. "Then," said Charles, "of all the eminent personages I
have ever read of, Alexander the Great is the man who most excites my
curiosity, and whom it would most gratify my wishes to see in the very
form in which he lived." Faustus rejoined, that it was out of his
power truly to raise the dead, but that he had spirits at his command
who had often seen that great conqueror, and that Faustus would
willingly place him before the emperor as he required. He conditioned
that Charles should not speak to him, nor attempt to touch him. The
emperor promised compliance. After a few ceremonies therefore, Faustus
opened a door, and brought in Alexander exactly in the form in which
he had lived, with the same garments, and every circumstance
corresponding. Alexander made his obeisance to the emperor, and walked
several times round him. The queen of Alexander was then introduced in
the same manner. Charles just then recollected, he had read that
Alexander had a wart on the nape of his neck; and with proper
precautions Faustus allowed the emperor to examine the apparition by
this test. Alexander then vanished.

As doctor Faustus waited in court, he perceived a certain knight, who
had fallen asleep in a bow-window, with his head out at window. The
whim took the doctor, to fasten on his brow the antlers of a stag.
Presently the knight was roused from his nap, when with all his
efforts he could not draw in his head on account of the antlers which
grew upon it. The courtiers laughed exceedingly at the distress of the
knight, and, when they had sufficiently diverted themselves, Faustus
took off his conjuration, and set the knight at liberty.

Soon after Faustus retired from Inspruck. Meanwhile the knight, having
conceived a high resentment against the conjuror, waylaid him with
seven horsemen on the road by which he had to pass. Faustus however
perceived them, and immediately made himself invisible. Meanwhile the
knight spied on every side to discover the conjuror; but, as he was
thus employed, he heard a sudden noise of drums and trumpets and
cymbals, and saw a regiment of horse advancing against him. He
immediately turned off in another direction; but was encountered by a
second regiment of horse. This occurred no less than six times; and
the knight and his companions were compelled to surrender at
discretion. These regiments were so many devils; and Faustus now
appeared in a new form as the general of this army. He obliged the
knight and his party to dismount, and give up their swords. Then with
a seeming generosity he gave them new horses and new swords, But this
was all enchantment. The swords presently turned into switches; and
the horses, plunging into a river on their road, vanished from beneath
their riders, who were thoroughly drenched in the stream, and scarcely
escaped with their lives.

Many of Faustus's delusions are rather remarkable as tricks of merry
vexation, than as partaking of those serious injuries which we might
look for in an implement of hell. In one instance he inquired of a
countryman who was driving a load of hay, what compensation he would
judge reasonable for the doctor's eating as much of his hay as he
should be inclined to. The waggoner replied, that for half a stiver
(one farthing) he should be welcome to eat as much as he pleased. The
doctor presently fell to, and ate at such a rate, that the peasant was
frightened lest his whole load should be consumed. He therefore
offered Faustus a gold coin, value twenty-seven shillings, to be off
his bargain. The doctor took it; and, when the countryman came to his
journey's end, he found his cargo undiminished even by a single blade.

Another time, as Faustus was walking along the road near Brunswick,
the whim took him of asking a waggoner who was driving by, to treat
him with a ride in his vehicle. "No, I will not," replied the boor;
"my horses will have enough to do to drag their proper load." "You
churl," said the doctor, "since you will not let your wheels carry me,
you shall carry them yourself as far as from the gates of the city."
The wheels then detached themselves, and flew through the air, to the
gates of the town from which they came. At the same time the horses
fell to the ground, and were utterly unable to raise themselves up.
The countryman, frightened, fell on his knees to the doctor, and
promised, if he would forgive him, never to offend in like manner
again. Faustus now, relenting a little, bade the waggoner take a
handful of sand from the road, and scatter on his horses, and they
would be well. At the same time he directed the man to go to the four
gates of Brunswick, and he would find his wheels, one at each gate.

In another instance, Faustus went into a fair, mounted on a noble
beast, richly caparisoned, the sight of which presently brought all
the horse-fanciers about him. After considerable haggling, he at last
disposed of his horse to a dealer for a handsome price, only cautioning
him at parting, how he rode the horse to water. The dealer, despising
the caution that had been given him, turned his horse the first thing
towards the river. He had however no sooner plunged in, than the horse
vanished, and the rider found himself seated on a saddle of straw, in
the middle of the stream. With difficulty he waded to the shore, and
immediately, enquiring out the doctor's inn, went to him to complain
of the cheat. He was directed to Faustus's room, and entering found
the conjuror on his bed, apparently asleep. He called to him lustily,
but the doctor took no notice. Worked up beyond his patience, he next
laid hold of Faustus's foot, that he might rouse him the more
effectually. What was his surprise, to find the doctor's leg and foot
come off in his hand! Faustus screamed, apparently in agony of pain,
and the dealer ran out of the room as fast as he could, thinking that
he had the devil behind him.

In one instance three young noblemen applied to Faustus, having been
very desirous to be present at the marriage of the son of the duke of
Bavaria at Mentz, but having overstaid the time, in which it would
have been possible by human means to accomplish the journey. Faustus,
to oblige them, led them into his garden, and, spreading a large
mantle upon a grass-plot, desired them to step on it, and placed
himself in the midst. He then recited a certain form of conjuration.
At the same time he conditioned with them, that they should on no
account speak to any one at the marriage, and, if spoken to, should
not answer again. They were carried invisibly through the air, and
arrived in excellent time. At a certain moment they became visible,
but were still bound to silence. One of them however broke the
injunction, and amused himself with the courtiers. The consequence was
that, when the other two were summoned by the doctor to return, he was
left behind. There was something so extraordinary in their sudden
appearance, and the subsequent disappearance of the others, that he
who remained was put in prison, and threatened with the torture the
next day, if he would not make a full disclosure. Faustus however
returned before break of day, opened the gates of the prison, laid all
the guards asleep, and carried off the delinquent in triumph.

On one occasion Faustus, having resolved to pass a jovial evening,
took some of his old college-companions, and invited them to make free
with the archbishop of Saltzburgh's cellar. They took a ladder, and
scaled the wall. They seated themselves round, and placed a
three-legged stool, with bottles and glasses in the middle. They were
in the heart of their mirth, when the butler made his appearance, and
began to cry thieves with all his might. The doctor at once conjured
him, so that he could neither speak nor move. There he was obliged to
sit, while Faustus and his companions tapped every vat in the cellar.
They then carried him along with them in triumph. At length they came
to a lofty tree, where Faustus ordered them to stop; and the butler
was in the greatest fright, apprehending that they would do no less
than hang him. The doctor however was contented, by his art to place
him on the topmost branch, where he was obliged to remain trembling
and almost dead with the cold, till certain peasants came out to their
work, whom he hailed, and finally with great difficulty they rescued
him from his painful eminence, and placed him safely on the ground.

On another occasion Faustus entertained several of the junior members
of the university of Wittenberg at his chambers. One of them,
referring to the exhibition the doctor had made of Alexander the Great
to the emperor Charles V, said it would gratify him above all things,
if he could once behold the famous Helen of Greece, whose beauty was
so great as to have roused all the princes of her country to arms, and
to have occasioned a ten years' war. Faustus consented to indulge his
curiosity, provided all the company would engage to be merely mute
spectators of the scene. This being promised, he left the room, and
presently brought in Helen. She was precisely as Homer has described
her, when she stood by the side of Priam on the walls of Troy, looking
on the Grecian chiefs. Her features were irresistibly attractive; and
her full, moist lips were redder than the summer cherries. Faustus
shortly after obliged his guests with her bust in marble, from which
several copies were taken, no one knowing the name of the original
artist.

No long time elapsed after this, when the doctor was engaged in
delivering a course of lectures on Homer at Erfurth, one of the
principal cities of Germany. It having been suggested to him that it
would very much enhance the interest of his lectures, if he would
exhibit to the company the heroes of Greece exactly as they appeared
to their contemporaries, Faustus obligingly yielded to the proposal.
The heroes of the Trojan war walked in procession before the
astonished auditors, no less lively in the representation than Helen
had been shewn before, and each of them with some characteristic
attitude and striking expression of countenance.

When the doctor happened to be at Frankfort, there came there four
conjurors, who obtained vast applause by the trick of cutting off one
another's heads, and fastening them on again. Faustus was exasperated
at this proceeding, and regarded them as laying claim to a skill
superior to his own. He went, and was invisibly present at their
exhibition. They placed beside them a vessel with liquor which they
pretended was the elixir of life, into which at each time they threw a
plant resembling the lily, which no sooner touched the liquor than its
buds began to unfold, and shortly it appeared in full blossom. The
chief conjuror watched his opportunity; and, when the charm was
complete, made no more ado but struck off the head of his fellow that
was next to him, and dipping it in the liquor, adjusted it to the
shoulders, where it became as securely fixed as before the operation.
This was repeated a second and a third time. At length it came to the
turn of the chief conjuror to have his head smitten off. Faustus stood
by invisibly, and at the proper time broke off the flower of the lily
without any one being aware of it. The head therefore of the principal
conjuror was struck off; but in vain was it steeped in the liquor. The
other conjurors were at a loss to account for the disappearance of the
lily, and fumbled for a long time with the old sorcerer's head, which
would not stick on in any position in which it could be placed.

Faustus was in great favour with the Prince of Anhalt. On one occasion,
after residing some days in his court, he said to the prince, "Will
your highness do me the favour to partake of a small collation at a
castle which belongs to me out at your city-gates?" The prince
graciously consented. The prince and princess accompanied the doctor,
and found a castle which Faustus had erected by magic during the
preceding night. The castle, with five lofty towers, and two great
gates, inclosing a spacious court, stood in the midst of a beautiful
lake, stocked with all kinds of fish, and every variety of water-fowl.
The court exhibited all sorts of animals, beside birds of every colour
and song, which flitted from tree to tree. The doctor then ushered his
guests into the hall, with an ample suite of apartments, branching off
on each side. In one of the largest they found a banquet prepared,
with the pope's plate of gold, which Mephostophiles had borrowed for
the day. The viands were of the most delicious nature, with the
choicest wines in the world. The banquet being over, Faustus conducted
the prince and princess back to the palace. But, before they had gone
far, happening to turn their heads, they saw the whole castle blown up,
and all that had been prepared for the occasion vanish at once in a
vast volume of fire.

One Christmas-time Faustus gave a grand entertainment to certain
distinguished persons of both sexes at Wittenberg. To render the scene
more splendid, he contrived to exhibit a memorable inversion of the
seasons. As the company approached the doctor's house, they were
surprised to find, though there was a heavy snow through the
neighbouring fields, that Faustus's court and garden bore not the
least marks of the season, but on the contrary were green and blooming
as in the height of summer. There was an appearance of the freshest
vegetation, together with a beautiful vineyard, abounding with grapes,
figs, raspberries, and an exuberance of the finest fruits. The large,
red Provence roses, were as sweet to the scent as the eye, and looked
perfectly fresh and sparkling with dew.

As Faustus was now approaching the last year of his term, he seemed to
resolve to pamper his appetite with every species of luxury. He
carefully accumulated all the materials of voluptuousness and
magnificence. He was particularly anxious in the selection of women
who should serve for his pleasures. He had one Englishwoman, one
Hungarian, one French, two of Germany, and two from different parts of
Italy, all of them eminent for the perfections which characterised
their different countries.

As Faustus's demeanour was particularly engaging, there were many
respectable persons in the city in which he lived, that became
interested in his welfare. These applied to a certain monk of
exemplary purity of life and devotion, and urged him to do every thing
he could to rescue the doctor from impending destruction. The monk
began with him with tender and pathetic remonstrances. He then drew a
fearful picture of the wrath of God, and the eternal damnation which
would certainly ensue. He reminded the doctor of his extraordinary
gifts and graces, and told him how different an issue might reasonably
have been expected from him. Faustus listened attentively to all the
good monk said, but replied mournfully that it was too late, that he
had despised and insulted the Lord, that he had deliberately sealed a
solemn compact to the devil, and that there was no possibility of
going back. The monk answered, "You are mistaken. Cry to the Lord for
grace; and it shall still be given. Shew true remorse; confess your
sins; abstain for the future from all acts of sorcery and diabolical
interference; and you may rely on final salvation." The doctor however
felt that all endeavours would be hopeless, He found in himself an
incapacity, for true repentance. And finally the devil came to him,
reproached him for breach of contract in listening to the pious
expostulations of a saint, threatened that in case of infidelity he
would take him away to hell even before his time, and frightened the
doctor into the act of signing a fresh contract in ratification of
that which he had signed before.

At length Faustus ultimately arrived at the end of the term for which
he had contracted with the devil. For two or three years before it
expired, his character gradually altered. He became subject to fits of
despondency, was no longer susceptible of mirth and amusement, and
reflected with bitter agony on the close in which the whole must
terminate. During the last month of his period, he no longer sought
the services of his infernal ally, but with the utmost unwillingness
saw his arrival. But Mephostophiles now attended him unbidden, and
treated him with biting scoffs and reproaches. "You have well studied
the Scriptures," he said, "and ought to have known that your safety
lay in worshipping God alone. You sinned with your eyes open, and can
by no means plead ignorance. You thought that twenty-four years was a
term that would have no end; and you now see how rapidly it is
flitting away. The term for which you sold yourself to the devil is a
very different thing; and, after the lapse of thousands of ages, the
prospect before you will be still as unbounded as ever. You were
warned; you were earnestly pressed to repent; but now it is too late."

After the demon, Mephostophiles, had long tormented Faustus in this
manner, he suddenly disappeared, consigning him over to wretchedness,
vexation and despair.

The whole twenty-four years were now expired. The day before,
Mephostophiles again made his appearance, holding in his hand the bond
which the doctor had signed with his blood, giving him notice that the
next day, the devil, his master, would come for him, and advising him
to hold himself in readiness. Faustus, it seems, had earned himself
much good will among the younger members of the university by his
agreeable manners, by his willingness to oblige them, and by the
extraordinary spectacles with which he occasionally diverted them.
This day he resolved to pass in a friendly farewel. He invited a
number of them to meet him at a house of public reception, in a hamlet
adjoining to the city. He bespoke a large room in the house for a
banqueting room, another apartment overhead for his guests to sleep in,
and a smaller chamber at a little distance for himself. He furnished
his table with abundance of delicacies and wines. He endeavoured to
appear among them in high spirits; but his heart was inwardly sad.

When the entertainment was over, Faustus addressed them, telling them
that this was the last day of his life, reminding them of the wonders
with which he had frequently astonished them, and informing them of
the condition upon which he had held this power. They, one and all,
expressed the deepest sorrow at the intelligence. They had had the
idea of something unlawful in his proceedings; but their notions had
been very far from coming up to the truth. They regretted exceedingly
that he had not been unreserved in his communications at an earlier
period. They would have had recourse in his behalf to the means of
religion, and have applied to pious men, desiring them to employ their
power to intercede with heaven in his favour. Prayer and penitence
might have done much for him; and the mercy of heaven was unbounded.
They advised him still to call upon God, and endeavour to secure an
interest in the merits of the Saviour.

Faustus assured them that it was all in vain, and that his tragical
fate was inevitable. He led them to their sleeping apartment, and
recommended to them to pass the night as they could, but by no means,
whatever they might happen to hear, to come out of it; as their
interference could in no way be beneficial to him, and might be
attended with the most serious injury to themselves. They lay still
therefore, as he had enjoined them; but not one of them could close
his eyes.

Between twelve and one in the night they heard first a furious storm
of wind round all sides of the house, as if it would have torn away
the walls from their foundations. This no sooner somewhat abated, than
a noise was heard of discordant and violent hissing, as if the house
was full of all sorts of venomous reptiles, but which plainly
proceeded from Faustus's chamber. Next they heard the doctor's
room-door vehemently burst open, and cries for help uttered with
dreadful agony, but a half-suppressed voice, which presently grew
fainter and fainter. Then every thing became still, as if the
everlasting motion of the world was suspended.

When at length it became broad day, the students went in a body into
the doctor's apartment. But he was no where to be seen. Only the walls
were found smeared with his blood, and marks as if his brains had been
dashed out. His body was finally discovered at some distance from the
house, his limbs dismembered, and marks of great violence about the
features of his face. The students gathered up the mutilated parts of
his body, and afforded them private burial at the temple of Mars in
the village where he died.

A ludicrous confusion of ideas has been produced by some persons from
the similarity of names of Faustus, the supposed magician of
Wittenberg, and Faust or Fust of Mentz, the inventor, or first
establisher of the art of printing. It has been alleged that the exact
resemblance of the copies of books published by the latter, when no
other mode of multiplying copies was known but by the act of
transcribing, was found to be such, as could no way be accounted for
by natural means, and that therefore it was imputed to the person who
presented these copies, that he must necessarily be assisted by the
devil. It has further been stated, that Faust, the printer, swore the
craftsmen he employed at his press to inviolable secrecy, that he
might the more securely keep up the price of his books. But this
notion of the identity of the two persons is entirely groundless.
Faustus, the magician, is described in the romance as having been born
in 1491, twenty-five years after the period at which the printer is
understood to have died, and there is no one coincidence between the
histories of the two persons, beyond the similarity of names, and a
certain mystery (or magical appearance) that inevitably adheres to the
practice of an art hitherto unknown. If any secret reference had been
intended in the romance to the real character of the illustrious
introducer of an art which has been productive of such incalculable
benefits to mankind, it would be impossible to account for such a
marvellous inconsistence in the chronology.

Others have carried their scepticism so far, as to have started a
doubt whether there was ever really such a person as Faustus of
Wittenberg, the alleged magician. But the testimony of Wierus, Philip
Camerarius, Melancthon and others, his contemporaries, sufficiently
refutes this supposition. The fact is, that there was undoubtedly such
a man, who, by sleights of dexterity, made himself a reputation as if
there was something supernatural in his performances, and that he was
probably also regarded with a degree of terror and abhorrence by the
superstitious. On this theme was constructed a romance, which once
possessed the highest popularity, and furnished a subject to the
dramatical genius of Marlow, Leasing, Goethe, and others.--It is
sufficiently remarkable, that the notoriety of this romance seems to
have suggested to Shakespear the idea of sending the grand conception
of his brain, Hamlet, prince of Denmark, to finish his education at
the university of Wittenberg.

And here it may not be uninstructive to remark the different tone
of the record of the acts of Ziito, the Bohemian, and Faustus of
Wittenburg, though little more than half a century elapsed between
the periods at which they were written. Dubravius, bishop of Olmutz
in Moravia, to whose pen we are indebted for what we know of Ziito,
died in the year 1553. He has deemed it not unbecoming to record in
his national history of Bohemia, the achievements of this magician,
who, he says, exhibited them before Wenceslaus, king of the country,
at the celebration of his marriage. A waggon-load of sorcerers arrived
at Prague on that occasion for the entertainment of the company. But,
at the close of that century, the exploits of Faustus were no longer
deemed entitled to a place in national history, but were more
appropriately taken for the theme of a romance. Faustus and his
performances were certainly contemplated with at least as much horror
as the deeds of Ziito. But popular credulity was no longer wound to
so high a pitch: the marvels effected by Faustus are not represented
as challenging the observation of thousands at a public court, and
on the occasion of a royal festival. They "hid their diminished heads,"
and were performed comparatively in a corner.


SABELLICUS.

A pretended magician is recorded by Naudé, as living about this time,
named Georgius Sabellicus, who, he says, if loftiness and arrogance
of assumption were enough to establish a claim to the possession of
supernatural gifts, would beyond all controversy be recognised for
a chief and consummate sorcerer. It was his ambition by the most
sounding appellations of this nature to advance his claim to immortal
reputation. He called himself, "The most accomplished Georgius
Sabellicus, a second Faustus, the spring and centre of necromantic
art, an astrologer, a magician, consummate in chiromancy, and in
agromancy, pyromancy and hydromancy inferior to none that ever lived."
I mention this the rather, as affording an additional proof how highly
Faustus was rated at the time in which he is said to have flourished.

It is specially worthy of notice, that Naudé, whose book is a sort
of register of all the most distinguished names in the annals of
necromancy, drawn up for the purpose of vindicating their honour,
now here [Errata: _read_ no where] mentions Faustus, except once
in this slight and cursory way.


PARACELSUS

Paracelsus, or, as he styled himself, Philippus Aureolus Theophrastus
Bombastus Paracelsus de Hohenheim, was a man of great notoriety and
eminence, about the same time as Dr. Faustus. He was born in the year
1493, and died in 1541. His father is said to have lived in some
repute; but the son early became a wanderer in the world, passing
his youth in the occupation of foretelling future events by the stars
and by chiromancy, invoking the dead, and performing various operations
of alchemy and magic. He states Trithemius to have been his instructor
in the science of metals. He was superficial in literature, and says
of himself that at one time he did not open a book for ten years
together. He visited the mines of Bohemia, Sweden and the East to
perfect himself in metallic knowledge. He travelled through Prussia,
Lithuania, Poland, Transylvania and Illyria, conversing indifferently
with physicians and old women, that he might extract from them the
practical secrets of their art. He visited Egypt, Tartary and
Constantinople, at which last place, as he says, he learned the
transmutation of metals and the philosopher's stone. He boasts also
of the elixir of life, by means of which he could prolong the life
of man to the age of the antediluvians. He certainly possessed
considerable sagacity and a happy spirit of daring, which induced
him to have recourse to the application of mercury and opium in the
cure of diseases, when the regular physicians did not venture on the
use of them. He therefore was successfully employed by certain eminent
persons in desperate cases, and was consulted by Erasmus. He gradually
increased in fame, and in the year 1526 was chosen professor of natural
philosophy and surgery in the university of Bale. Here he delivered
lectures in a very bold and presumptuous style. He proclaimed himself
the monarch of medicine, and publicly burned the writings of Galen
and Avicenna as pretenders and impostors.

This however was the acme of his prosperity. His system was extremely
popular for one year; but then he lost himself by brutality and
intemperance. He had drunk water only for the first five-and-twenty
years of his life; but now indulged himself in beastly crapulence
with the dregs of society, and scarcely ever took off his clothes
by day or night. After one year therefore spent at Bale, he resumed
his former vagabond life, and, having passed through many vicissitudes,
some of them of the most abject poverty, he died at the age of
forty-eight.

Paracelsus in fact exhibited in his person the union of a quack, a
boastful and impudent pretender, with a considerable degree of natural
sagacity and shrewdness. Such an union is not uncommon in the present
day; but it was more properly in its place, when the cultivation of
the faculties of the mind was more restricted than now, and the law
of criticism of facts and evidence was nearly unknown. He took
advantage of the credulity and love of wonder incident to the
generality of our species; and, by dint of imposing on others,
succeeded in no small degree in imposing on himself. His intemperance
and arrogance of demeanour gave the suitable finish to his character.
He therefore carefully cherished in those about him the idea that
there was in him a kind of supernatural virtue, and that he had the
agents of an invisible world at his command. In particular he gave
out that he held conferences with a familiar or demon, whom for the
convenience of consulting he was in the habit of carrying about with
him in the hilt of his sword.


CARDAN.

Jerome Cardan, who was only a few years younger than Paracelsus, was
a man of a very different character. He had considerable refinement
and discrimination, and ranked among the first scholars of his day.
He is however most of all distinguished for the Memoirs he has left
us of his life, which are characterised by a frankness and unreserve
which are almost without a parallel. He had undoubtedly a considerable
spice of madness in his composition. He says of himself, that he was
liable to extraordinary fits of abstraction and elevation of mind,
which by their intenseness became so intolerable, that he gladly had
recourse to very severe bodily pain by way of getting rid of them.
That in such cases he would bite his lips till they bled, twist his
fingers almost to dislocation, and whip his legs with rods, which
he found a great relief to him. That he would talk purposely of
subjects which he knew were particularly offensive to the company
he was in; that he argued on any side of a subject, without caring
whether he was right or wrong; and that he would spend whole nights
in gaming, often venturing as the stake he played for, the furniture
of his house, and his wife's jewels.

Cardan describes three things of himself, which he habitually
experienced, but respecting which he had never unbosomed himself to
any of his friends. The first was, a capacity which he felt in himself
of abandoning his body in a sort of extacy whenever he pleased. He
felt in these cases a sort of splitting of the heart, as if his soul
was about to withdraw, the sensation spreading over his whole frame,
like the opening of a door for the dismissal of its guest. His
apprehension was, that he was out of his body, and that by an
energetic exertion he still retained a small hold of his corporeal
figure. The second of his peculiarities was, that he saw, when he
pleased, whatever he desired to see, not through the force of
imagination, but with his material organs: he saw groves, animals,
orbs, as he willed. When he was a child, he saw these things, as they
occurred, without any previous volition or anticipation that such
a thing was about to happen. But, after he had arrived at years of
maturity, he saw them only when he desired, and such things as he
desired. These images were in perpetual succession, one after another.
The thing incidental to him which he mentions in the third place was,
that he could not recollect any thing that ever happened to him,
whether good, ill, or indifferent, of which he had not been admonished,
and that a very short time before, in a dream. These things serve
to shew of what importance he was in his own eyes, and also, which
is the matter he principally brings it to prove, the subtlety and
delicacy of his animal nature.

Cardan speaks uncertainly and contradictorily as to his having a
genius or demon perpetually attending him, advising him of what was
to happen, and forewarning him of sinister events. He concludes
however that he had no such attendant, but that it was the excellence
of his nature, approaching to immortality. He was much addicted to
the study of astrology, and laid claim to great skill as a physician.
He visited the court of London, and calculated the nativity of king
Edward VI. He was sent for as a physician by cardinal Beaton,
archbishop of St Andrews, whom, according to Melvile, [208] he
recovered to speech and health, and the historian appears to attribute
the cure to magic. He calculated the nativity of Jesus Christ, which
was imputed to him as an impious undertaking, inasmuch as it supposed
the creator of the world to be subject to the influence of the stars.
He also predicted his own death, and is supposed by some to have
forwarded that event, by abstinence from food at the age of
seventy-five, that he might not bely his prediction.


QUACKS, WHO IN COOL BLOOD UNDERTOOK TO OVERREACH MANKIND.

Hitherto we have principally passed such persons in review, as seem
to have been in part at least the victims of their own delusions.
But beside these there has always been a numerous class of men, who,
with minds perfectly disengaged and free, have applied themselves
to concert the means of overreaching the simplicity, or baffling the
penetration, of those who were merely spectators, and uninitiated
in the mystery of the arts that were practised upon them. Such was
no doubt the case with the speaking heads and statues, which were
sometimes exhibited in the ancient oracles. Such was the case with
certain optical delusions, which were practised on the unsuspecting,
and were contrived to produce on them the effect of supernatural
revelations. Such is the story of Bel and the Dragon in the book of
Apocrypha, where the priests daily placed before the idol twelve
measures of flour, and forty sheep, and six vessels of wine,
pretending that the idol consumed all these provisions, when in fact
they entered the temple by night, by a door under the altar, and
removed them.


BENVENUTO CELLINI.

We have a story minutely related by Benvenuto Cellini in his Life,
which it is now known was produced by optical delusion, but which
was imposed upon the artist and his companions as altogether
supernatural. It occurred a very short time before the death of pope
Clement the Seventh in 1534, and is thus detailed. It took place in
the Coliseum at Rome.

"It came to pass through a variety of odd accidents, that I made
acquaintance with a Sicilian priest, who was a man of genius, and
well versed in the Greek and Latin languages. Happening one day to
have some conversation with him, where the subject turned upon the
art of necromancy, I, who had a great desire to know something of
the matter, told him, that I had all my life had a curiosity to be
acquainted with the mysteries of this art. The priest made answer,
that the man must be of a resolute and steady temper, who entered
on that study. I replied, that I had fortitude and resolution enough
to desire to be initiated in it. The priest subjoined, 'If you think
you have the heart to venture, I will give you all the satisfaction
you can desire.' Thus we agreed to enter upon a scheme of necromancy.

"The priest one evening prepared to satisfy me, and desired me to
look for a companion or two. I invited one Vincenzio Romoli, who was
my intimate acquaintance, and he brought with him a native of Pistoia
who cultivated the art of necromancy himself. We repaired to the
Coliseum; and the priest, according to the custom of conjurors, began
to draw circles on the ground, with the most impressive ceremonies
imaginable. He likewise brought with him all sorts of precious
perfumes and fire, with some compositions which diffused noisome and
bad odours. As soon as he was in readiness, he made an opening to
the circle, and took us by the hand, and ordered the other
necromancer, his partner, to throw perfumes into the fire at a proper
time, intrusting the care of the fire and the perfumes to the rest;
and then he began his incantations.

"This ceremony lasted above an hour and a half, when there appeared
several legions of devils, so that the amphitheatre was quite filled
with them. I was busy about the perfumes, when the priest, who knew
that there was a sufficient number of infernal spirits, turned about
to me, and said, 'Benvenuto, ask them something.' I answered, 'Let
them bring me into company with my Sicilian mistress, Angelica.' That
night we obtained no answer of any sort; but I received great
satisfaction in having my curiosity so far indulged.

"The necromancer told me that it was requisite we should go a second
time, assuring me that I should be satisfied in whatever I asked; but
that I must bring with me a boy that had never known woman. I took
with me my apprentice, who was about twelve years of age; with the
same Vincenzio Romoli, who had been my companion the first time, and
one Agnolino Gaddi, an intimate acquaintance, whom I likewise
prevailed on to assist at the ceremony. When we came to the place
appointed, the priest, having made his preparations as before with the
same and even more striking ceremonies, placed us within the circle,
which he had drawn with a more wonderful art and in a more solemn
manner, than at our former meeting. Thus having committed the care of
the perfumes and the fire to my friend Vincenzio, who was assisted by
Gaddi, he put into my hands a pintacolo, or magical chart, and bid me
turn it towards the places to which he should direct me; and under the
pintacolo I held my apprentice. The necromancer, having begun to make
his most tremendous invocations, called by their names a multitude of
demons who were the leaders of the several legions, and questioned
them, by the virtue and power of the eternal, uncreated God, who lives
for ever, in the Hebrew language, as also in Latin and Greek; insomuch
that the amphitheatre was filled, almost in an instant, with demons a
hundred times more numerous than at the former conjuration. Vincenzio
meanwhile was busied in making a fire with the assistance of Gaddi,
and burning a great quantity of precious perfumes. I, by the direction
of the necromancer, again desired to be in company with my Angelica.
He then turning upon me said, 'Know, they have declared that in the
space of a month you shall be in her company.'

"He then requested me to stand by him resolutely, because the legions
were now above a thousand more in number than he had designed; and
besides these were the most dangerous; so that, after they had
answered my question, it behoved him to be civil to them, and dismiss
them quietly. At the same time the boy under the pintacolo was in a
terrible fright, saying, that there were in the place a million of
fierce men who threatened to destroy us; and that, besides, there were
four armed giants of enormous stature, who endeavoured to break into
our circle. During this time, while the necromancer, trembling with
fear, endeavoured by mild means to dismiss them in the best way he
could, Vincenzio, who quivered like an aspen leaf, took care of the
perfumes. Though I was as much afraid as any of them, I did my utmost
to conceal it; so that I greatly contributed to inspire the rest with
resolution; but the truth is, I gave myself over for a dead man,
seeing the horrid fright the necromancer was in.

"The boy had placed his head between his knees; and said, 'In this
attitude will I die; for we shall all surely perish.' I told him that
those demons were under us, and what he saw was smoke and shadow; so
bid him hold up his head and take courage. No sooner did he look up,
than he cried out, 'The whole amphitheatre is burning, and the fire is
just falling on us.' So, covering his eyes with his hands, he again
exclaimed, that destruction was inevitable, and he desired to see no
more. The necromancer intreated me to have a good heart, and to take
care to burn proper perfumes; upon which I turned to Vincenzio, and
bade him burn all the most precious perfumes he had. At the same time
I cast my eyes upon Gaddi, who was terrified to such a degree, that he
could scarcely distinguish objects, and seemed to be half dead. Seeing
him in this condition, I said to him, 'Gaddi, upon these occasions a
man should not yield to fear, but stir about to give some assistance;
so come directly, and put on more of these perfumes.' Gaddi accordingly
attempted to move; but the effect was annoying both to our sense of
hearing and smell, and overcame the perfumes.

"The boy perceiving this, once more ventured to raise his head, and,
seeing me laugh, began to take courage, and said, 'The devils are
flying away with a vengeance.' In this condition we staid, till the
bell rang for morning prayers. The boy again told us, that there
remained but few devils, and those were at a great distance. When the
magician had performed the rest of his ceremonies, he stripped off his
gown, and took up a wallet full of books, which he had brought with
him. We all went out of the circle together, keeping as close to each
other as we possibly could, especially the boy, who placed himself in
the middle, holding the necromancer by the coat, and me by the cloak.

"As we were going to our houses in the quarter of Banchi, the boy told
us, that two of the demons whom we had seen at the amphitheatre, went
on before us leaping and skipping, sometimes running upon the roofs of
the houses, and sometimes on the ground. The priest declared that, as
often as he had entered magic circles, nothing so extraordinary had
ever happened to him. As we went along, he would fain have persuaded
me to assist at the consecrating a book, from which he said we should
derive immense riches. We should then ask the demons to discover to us
the various treasures with which the earth abounds, which would raise
us to opulence and power; but that those love-affairs were mere
follies from which no good could be expected. I made answer, that I
would readily have accepted his proposal if I had understood Latin. He
assured me that the knowledge of Latin was nowise material; but that
he could never meet with a partner of resolution and intrepidity equal
to mine, and that that would be to him an invaluable acquisition."
Immediately subsequent to this scene, Cellini got into one of those
scrapes, in which he was so frequently involved by his own violence
and ferocity; and the connection was never again renewed.

The first remark that arises out of this narrative is, that nothing is
actually done by the supernatural personages which are exhibited. The
magician reports certain answers as given by the demons; but these
answers do not appear to have been heard from any lips but those of
him who was the creator or cause of the scene. The whole of the demons
therefore were merely figures, produced by the magic lantern (which is
said to have been invented by Roger Bacon), or by something of that
nature. The burning of the perfumes served to produce a dense
atmosphere, that was calculated to exaggerate, and render more
formidable and terrific, the figures which were exhibited. The magic
lantern, which is now the amusement only of servant-maids, and boys at
school in their holidays, served at this remote period, and when the
power of optical delusions was unknown, to terrify men of wisdom and
penetration, and make them believe that legions of devils from the
infernal regions were come among them, to produce the most horrible
effects, and suspend and invert the laws of nature. It is probable,
that the magician, who carried home with him a "wallet full of books,"
also carried at the same time the magic lantern or mirror, with its
lights, which had served him for his exhibition, and that this was the
cause of the phenomenon, that they observed two of the demons which
they had seen at the amphitheatre, going before them on their return,
"leaping and skipping, sometimes running on the roofs of the houses,
and sometimes on the ground." [209]


NOSTRADAMUS.

Michael Nostradamus, a celebrated astrologer, was born at St. Remi in
Provence in the year 1503. He published a Century of Prophecies in
obscure and oracular terms and barbarous verse, and other works. In
the period in which he lived the pretended art of astrological
prediction was in the highest repute; and its professors were sought
for by emperors and kings, and entertained with the greatest
distinction and honour. Henry the Second of France, moved with his
great renown, sent for Nostradamus to court, received much
gratification from his visit, and afterward ordered him to Blois, that
he might see the princes, his sons, calculate their horoscopes, and
predict their future fortunes. He was no less in favour afterwards
with Charles the Ninth. He died in the year 1566.


DOCTOR DEE.

Dr. John Dee was a man who made a conspicuous figure in the sixteenth
century. He was born at London in the year 1527. He was an eminent
mathematician, and an indefatigable scholar. He says of himself, that,
having been sent to Cambridge when he was fifteen, he persisted for
several years in allowing himself only four hours for sleep in the
twenty-four, and two for food and refreshment, and that he constantly
occupied the remaining eighteen (the time for divine service only
excepted) in study. At Cambridge he superintended the exhibition of a
Greek play of Aristophanes, among the machinery of which he introduced
an artificial scarabaeus, or beetle, which flew up to the palace of
Jupiter, with a man on his back, and a basket of provisions. The
ignorant and astonished spectators ascribed this feat to the arts of
the magician; and Dee, annoyed by these suspicions, found it expedient
to withdraw to the continent. Here he resided first at the university
of Louvaine, at which place, his acquaintance was courted by the dukes
of Mantua and Medina, and from thence proceeded to Paris, where he
gave lectures on Euclid with singular applause.

In 1551 he returned to England, and was received with distinction by
sir John Check, and introduced to secretary Cecil, and even to king
Edward, from whom he received a pension of one hundred crowns _per
annum_, which he speedily after exchanged for a small living in the
church. In the reign of queen Mary he was for some time kindly
treated; but afterwards came into great trouble, and even into danger
of his life. He entered into correspondence with several of the
servants of queen Elizabeth at Woodstock, and was charged with
practising against Mary's life by enchantments. Upon this accusation,
he was seized and confined; and, being after several examinations
discharged of the indictment, was turned over to bishop Bonner to see
if any heresy could be found in him. After a tedious persecution he
was set at liberty in 1555, and was so little subdued by what he had
suffered, that in the following year he presented a petition to the
queen, requesting her co-operation in a plan for preserving and
recovering certain monuments of classical antiquity.

The principal study of Dee however at this time lay in astrology; and
accordingly, upon the accession of Elizabeth, Robert Dudley, her chief
favourite, was sent to consult the doctor as to the aspect of the
stars, that they might fix on an auspicious day for celebrating her
coronation. Some years after we find him again on the continent; and
in 1571, being taken ill at Louvaine, we are told the queen sent over
two physicians to accomplish his cure. Elizabeth afterwards visited
him at his house at Mortlake, that she might view his magazine of
mathematical instruments and curiosities; and about this time employed
him to defend her title to countries discovered in different parts of
the globe. He says of himself, that he received the most advantageous
offers from Charles V, Ferdinand, Maximilian II, and Rodolph II,
emperors of Germany, and from the czar of Muscovy an offer of L.2000
sterling _per annum_, upon condition that he would reside in his
dominions. All these circumstances were solemnly attested by Dee in a
Compendious Rehearsal of his Life and Studies for half-a-century,
composed at a later period, and read by him at his house at Mortlake
to two commissioners appointed by Elizabeth to enquire into his
circumstances, accompanied with evidences and documents to establish
the particulars. [210]

Had Dee gone no further than this, he would undoubtedly have ranked
among the profoundest scholars and most eminent geniuses that adorned
the reign of the maiden queen. But he was unfortunately cursed with an
ambition that nothing could satisfy; and, having accustomed his mind
to the wildest reveries, and wrought himself up to an extravagant
pitch of enthusiasm, he pursued a course that involved him in much
calamity, and clouded all his latter days with misery and ruin. He
dreamed perpetually of the philosopher's stone, and was haunted with
the belief of intercourse of a supramundane character. It is almost
impossible to decide among these things, how much was illusion, and
how much was forgery. Both were inextricably mixed in his proceedings;
and this extraordinary victim probably could not in his most
dispassionate moments precisely distinguish what belonged to the one,
and what to the other.

As Dee was an enthusiast, so he perpetually interposed in his
meditations prayers of the greatest emphasis and fervour. As he was
one day in November 1582, engaged in these devout exercises, he says
that there appeared to him the angel Uriel at the west window of his
Museum, who gave him a translucent stone, or chrystal, of a convex
form, that had the quality, when intently surveyed, of presenting
apparitions, and even emitting sounds, in consequence of which the
observer could hold conversations, ask questions and receive answers
from the figures he saw in the mirror. It was often necessary that the
stone should be turned one way and another in different positions,
before the person who consulted it gained the right focus; and then
the objects to be observed would sometimes shew themselves on the
surface of the stone, and sometime in different parts of the room by
virtue of the action of the stone. It had also this peculiarity, that
only one person, having been named as seer, could see the figures
exhibited, and hear the voices that spoke, though there might be
various persons in the room. It appears that the person who discerned
these visions must have his eyes and his ears uninterruptedly engaged
in the affair, so that, as Dee experienced, to render the communication
effectual, there must be two human beings concerned in the scene, one
of them to describe what he saw, and to recite the dialogue that took
place, and the other immediately to commit to paper all that his
partner dictated. Dee for some reason chose for himself the part of
the amanuensis, and had to seek for a companion, who was to watch the
stone, and repeat to him whatever he saw and heard.

It happened opportunely that, a short time before Dee received this
gift from on high, he contracted a familiar intercourse with one
Edward Kelly of Worcestershire, whom he found specially qualified to
perform the part which it was necessary to Dee to have adequately
filled. Kelly was an extraordinary character, and in some respects
exactly such a person as Dee wanted. He was just twenty-eight years
younger than the memorable personage, who now received him as an
inmate, and was engaged in his service at a stipulated salary of fifty
pounds a year.

Kelly entered upon life with a somewhat unfortunate adventure. He was
accused, when a young man, of forgery, brought to trial, convicted,
and lost his ears in the pillory. This misfortune however by no means
daunted him. He was assiduously engaged in the search for the
philosopher's stone. He had an active mind, great enterprise, and a
very domineering temper. Another adventure in which he had been
engaged previously to his knowledge of Dee, was in digging up the body
of a man, who had been buried only the day before, that he might
compel him by incantations, to answer questions, and discover future
events. There was this difference therefore between the two persons
previously to their league. Dee was a man of regular manners and
unspotted life, honoured by the great, and favourably noticed by
crowned heads in different parts of the world; while Kelly was a
notorious profligate, accustomed to the most licentious actions, and
under no restraint from morals or principle.

One circumstance that occurred early in the acquaintance of Kelly and
Dee it is necessary to mention. It serves strikingly to illustrate the
ascendancy of the junior and impetuous party over his more gifted
senior. Kelly led Dee, we are not told under what pretence, to visit
the celebrated ruins of Glastonbury Abbey in Somersetshire. Here, as
these curious travellers searched into every corner of the scene, they
met by some rare accident with a vase containing a certain portion of
the actual _elixir vitae_, that rare and precious liquid, so much
sought after, which has the virtue of converting the baser metals into
gold and silver. It had remained here perhaps ever since the time of
the highly-gifted St. Dunstan in the tenth century. This they carried
off in triumph: but we are not told of any special use to which they
applied it, till a few years after, when they were both on the
continent.

The first record of their consultations with the supramundane spirits,
was of the date of December 2, 1581, at Lexden Heath in the county of
Essex; and from this time they went on in a regular series of
consultations with and enquiries from these miraculous visitors, a
great part of which will appear to the uninitiated extremely puerile
and ludicrous, but which were committed to writing with the most
scrupulous exactness by Dee, the first part still existing in
manuscript, but the greater portion from 28 May 1583 to 1608, with
some interruptions, having been committed to the press by Dr. Meric
Casaubon in a well-sized folio in 1659, under the title of "A True and
Faithful Relation of what passed between Dr. John Dee and some
Spirits, tending, had it succeeded, to a general alteration of most
states and kingdoms of the world."

Kelly and Dee had not long been engaged in these supernatural
colloquies, before an event occurred which gave an entirely new turn
to their proceedings. Albert Alaski, a Polish nobleman, lord palatine
of the principality of Siradia, came over at this time into England,
urged, as he said, by a desire personally to acquaint himself with the
glories of the reign of Elizabeth, and the evidences of her unrivalled
talents. The queen and her favourite, the earl of Leicester, received
him with every mark of courtesy and attention, and, having shewn him
all the wonders of her court at Westminster and Greenwich, sent him to
Oxford, with a command to the dignitaries and heads of colleges, to
pay him every attention, and to lay open to his view all their rarest
curiosities. Among other things worthy of notice, Alaski enquired for
the celebrated Dr. Dee, and expressed the greatest impatience to be
acquainted with him.

Just at this juncture the earl of Leicester happened to spy Dr. Dee
among the crowd who attended at a royal levee. The earl immediately
advanced towards him; and, in his frank manner, having introduced him
to Alaski, expressed his intention of bringing the Pole to dine with
the doctor at his house at Mortlake. Embarrassed with this unexpected
honour, Dee no sooner got home, than he dispatched an express to the
earl, honestly confessing that he should be unable to entertain such
guests in a suitable manner, without being reduced to the expedient of
selling or pawning his plate, to procure him the means of doing so.
Leicester communicated the doctor's perplexity to Elizabeth; and the
queen immediately dispatched a messenger with a present of forty
angels, or twenty pounds, to enable him to receive his guests as
became him.

A great intimacy immediately commenced between Dee and the stranger.
Alaski, though possessing an extensive territory, was reduced by the
prodigality of himself or his ancestors to much embarrassment; and on
the other hand this nobleman appeared to Dee an instrument well
qualified to accomplish his ambitious purposes. Alaski was extremely
desirous to look into the womb of time; and Dee, it is likely,
suggested repeated hints of his extraordinary power from his
possession of the philosopher's stone. After two or three interviews,
and much seeming importunity on the part of the Pole, Dee and Kelly
graciously condescended to admit Alaski as a third party to their
secret meetings with their supernatural visitors, from which the rest
of the world were carefully excluded. Here the two Englishmen made use
of the vulgar artifice, of promising extraordinary good fortune to the
person of whom they purposed to make use. By the intervention of the
miraculous stone they told the wondering traveller, that he should
shortly become king of Poland, with the accession of several other
kingdoms, that he should overcome many armies of Saracens and Paynims,
and prove a mighty conqueror. Dee at the same time complained of the
disagreeable condition in which he was at home, and that Burleigh and
Walsingham were his malicious enemies. At length they concerted among
themselves, that they, Alaski, and Dee and Kelly with their wives and
families, should clandestinely withdraw out of England, and proceed
with all practicable rapidity to Alaski's territory in the kingdom of
Poland. They embarked on this voyage 21 September, and arrived at
Siradia the third of February following.

At this place however the strangers remained little more than a month.
Alaski found his finances in such disorder, that it was scarcely
possible for him to feed the numerous guests he had brought along with
him. The promises of splendid conquests which Dee and Kelly profusely
heaped upon him, were of no avail to supply the deficiency of his
present income. And the elixir they brought from Glastonbury was, as
they said, so incredibly rich in virtue, that they were compelled to
lose much time in making projection by way of trial, before they could
hope to arrive at the proper temperament for producing the effect they
desired.

In the following month Alaski with his visitors passed to Cracow, the
residence of the kings of Poland. Here they remained five months, Dee
and Kelly perpetually amusing the Pole with the extraordinary virtue
of the stone, which had been brought from heaven by an angel, and
busied in a thousand experiments with the elixir, and many tedious
preparations which they pronounced to be necessary, before the
compound could have the proper effect. The prophecies were uttered
with extreme confidence; but no external indications were afforded, to
shew that in any way they were likely to be realised. The experiments
and exertions of the laboratory were incessant; but no transmutation
was produced. At length Alaski found himself unable to sustain the
train of followers he had brought out of England. With mountains of
wealth, the treasures of the world promised, they were reduced to the
most grievous straits for the means of daily subsistence. Finally the
zeal of Alaski diminished; he had no longer the same faith in the
projectors that had deluded him; and he devised a way of sending them
forward with letters of recommendation to Rodolph II, emperor of
Germany, at his imperial seat of Prague, where they arrived on the
ninth of August.

Rodolph was a man, whose character and habits of life they judged
excellently adapted to their purpose. Dee had a long conference with
the emperor, in which he explained to him what wonderful things the
spirits promised to this prince, in case he proved exemplary of life,
and obedient to their suggestions, that he should be the greatest
conqueror in the world, and should take captive the Turk in his city
of Constantinople. Rodolph was extremely courteous in his reception,
and sent away Dee with the highest hopes that he had at length found
a personage with whom he should infallibly succeed to the extent of
his wishes. He sought however a second interview, and was baffled. At
one time the emperor was going to his country palace near Prague, and
at another was engaged in the pleasures of the chace.

He also complained that he was not sufficiently familiar with the
Latin tongue, to manage the conferences with Dee in a satisfactory
manner in person. He therefore deputed Curtzius, a man high in his
confidence, to enter into the necessary details with his learned
visitor. Dee also contrived to have Spinola, the ambassador from
Madrid to the court of the emperor, to urge his suit. The final result
was that Rodolph declined any further intercourse with Dee. He turned
a deaf ear to his prophecies, and professed to be altogether void of
faith as to his promises respecting the philosopher's stone. Dee
however was led on perpetually with hopes of better things from the
emperor, till the spring of the year 1585. At length he was obliged to
fly from Prague, the bishop of Placentia, the pope's nuncio, having it
in command from his holiness to represent to Rodolph how discreditable
it was for him to harbour English magicians, heretics, at his court.

From Prague Dee and his followers proceeded to Cracow. Here he found
means of introduction to Stephen, king of Poland, to whom immediately
he insinuated as intelligence from heaven, that Rodolph, the emperor,
would speedily be assassinated, and that Stephen would succeed him in
the throne of Germany. Stephen appears to have received Dee with more
condescension than Rodolph had done, and was once present at his
incantation and interview with the invisible spirits. Dee also lured
him on with promises respecting the philosopher's stone. Meanwhile the
magician was himself reduced to the strangest expedients for
subsistence. He appears to have daily expected great riches from the
transmutation of metals, and was unwilling to confess that he and his
family were in the mean time almost starving.

When king Stephen at length became wearied with fruitless expectation,
Dee was fortunate enough to meet with another and more patient dupe in
Rosenburg, a nobleman of considerable wealth at Trebona in the kingdom
of Bohemia. Here Dee appears to have remained till 1589, when he was
sent for home by Elizabeth. In what manner he proceeded during this
interval, and from whence he drew his supplies, we are only left to
conjecture. He lured on his victim with the usual temptation,
promising him that he should be king of Poland. In the mean time it is
recorded by him, that, on the ninth of December, 1586, he arrived at
the point of projection, having cut a piece of metal out of a brass
warming-pan; and merely heating it by the fire, and pouring on it a
portion of the elixir, it was presently converted into pure silver. We
are told that he sent the warming-pan and the piece of silver to queen
Elizabeth, that she might be convinced by her own eyes how exactly
they tallied, and that the one had unquestionably been a portion of
the other. About the same time it is said, that Dee and his associate
became more free in their expenditure; and in one instance it is
stated as an example, that Kelly gave away to the value of four
thousand pounds sterling in gold rings on occasion of the celebration
of the marriage of one of his maid-servants. On the twenty-seventh and
thirtieth of July, 1587, Dee has recorded in his journal his gratitude
to God for his unspeakable mercies on those days imparted, which has
been interpreted to mean further acquisitions of wealth by means of
the elixir.

Meanwhile perpetual occasions of dissention occurred between the two
great confederates, Kelly and Dee. They were in many respects unfitted
for each other's society. Dee was a man, who from his youth upward had
been indefatigable in study and research, had the consciousness of
great talents and intellect, and had been universally recognised as
such, and had possessed a high character for fervent piety and
blameless morals. Kelly was an impudent adventurer, a man of no
principles and of blasted reputation; yet fertile in resources, full
of self-confidence, and of no small degree of ingenuity. In their
mutual intercourse the audacious adventurer often had the upper hand
of the man who had lately possessed a well-earned reputation. Kelly
frequently professed himself tired of enacting the character of
interpreter of the Gods under Dee. He found Dee in all cases running
away with the superior consideration; while he in his own opinion best
deserved to possess it. The straitness of their circumstances, and the
misery they were occasionally called on to endure, we may be sure did
not improve their good understanding. Kelly once and again threatened
to abandon his leader. Dee continually soothed him, and prevailed on
him to stay.

Kelly at length started a very extraordinary proposition. Kelly, as
interpreter to the spirits, and being the only person who heard and
saw any thing, we may presume made them say whatever he pleased. Kelly
and Dee had both of them wives. Kelly did not always live harmoniously
with the partner of his bed. He sometimes went so far as to say that
he hated her. Dee was more fortunate. His wife was a person of good
family, and had hitherto been irreproachable in her demeanour. The
spirits one day revealed to Kelly, that they must henceforth have
their wives in common. The wife of Kelly was barren, and this curse
could no otherwise be removed. Having started the proposition, Kelly
played the reluctant party. Dee, who was pious and enthusiastic,
inclined to submit. He first indeed started the notion, that it could
only be meant that they should live in mutual harmony and good
understanding. The spirits protested against this, and insisted upon
the literal interpretation. Dee yielded, and compared his case to that
of Abraham, who at the divine command consented to sacrifice his son
Isaac. Kelly alleged that these spirits, which Dee had hitherto
regarded as messengers from God, could be no other than servants of
Satan. He persisted in his disobedience; and the spirits declared that
he was no longer worthy to be their interpreter, and that another
mediator must be found.

They named Arthur Dee, the son of the possessor of the stone, a
promising and well-disposed boy of only eight years of age. Dee
consecrated the youth accordingly to his high function by prayers and
religious rites for several days together. Kelly took horse and rode
away, protesting that they should meet no more. Arthur entered upon
his office, April 15, 1587. The experiment proved abortive. He saw
something; but not to the purpose. He heard no voices. At length
Kelly, on the third day, entered the room unexpectedly, "by miraculous
fortune," as Dee says, "or a divine fate," sate down between them, and
immediately saw figures, and heard voices, which the little Arthur was
not enabled to perceive. In particular he saw four heads inclosed in
an obelisk, which he perceived to represent the two magicians and
their wives, and interpreted to signify that unlimited communion in
which they were destined to engage. The matter however being still an
occasion of scruple, a spirit appeared, who by the language he used
was plainly no other than the Saviour of the world, and took away from
them the larger stone; for now it appears there were two stones. This
miracle at length induced all parties to submit; and the divine
command was no sooner obeyed, than the stone which had been
abstracted, was found again under the pillow of the wife of Dee.

It is not easy to imagine a state of greater degradation than that
into which this person had now fallen. During all the prime and vigour
of his intellect, he had sustained an eminent part among the learned
and the great, distinguished and honoured by Elizabeth and her
favourite. But his unbounded arrogance and self-opinion could never be
satisfied. And seduced, partly by his own weakness, and partly by the
insinuations of a crafty adventurer, he became a mystic of the most
dishonourable sort. He was induced to believe in a series of
miraculous communications without common sense, engaged in the pursuit
of the philosopher's stone, and no doubt imagined that he was
possessed of the great secret. Stirred up by these conceptions, he
left his native country, and became a wanderer, preying upon the
credulity of one prince and eminent man after another, and no sooner
was he discarded by one victim of credulity, than he sought another,
a vagabond on the earth, reduced from time to time to the greatest
distress, persecuted, dishonoured and despised by every party in their
turn. At length by incessant degrees he became dead to all moral
distinctions, and all sense of honour and self-respect. "Professing
himself to be wise he became a fool, walked in the vanity of his
imagination," and had his understanding under total eclipse. The
immoral system of conduct in which he engaged, and the strange and
shocking blasphemy that he mixed with it, render him at this time a
sort of character that it is painful to contemplate.

Led on as Dee at this time was by the ascendancy and consummate art of
Kelly, there was far from existing any genuine harmony between them;
and, after many squabbles and heart-burnings, they appear finally to
have parted in January 1589, Dee having, according to his own account,
at that time delivered up to Kelly, the elixir and the different
implements by which the transmutation of metals was to be effected.

Various overtures appear to have passed now for some years between Dee
and queen Elizabeth, intended to lead to his restoration to his native
country. Dee had upon different occasions expressed a wish to that
effect; and Elizabeth in the spring of 1589 sent him a message, that
removed from him all further thought of hesitation and delay. He set
out from Trebona with three coaches, and a baggage train correspondent,
and had an audience of the queen at Richmond towards the close of that
year. Upon the whole it is impossible perhaps not to believe, that
Elizabeth was influenced in this proceeding by the various reports
that had reached her of his extraordinary success with the
philosopher's stone, and the boundless wealth he had it in his power
to bestow. Many princes at this time contended with each other, as to
who should be happy enough by fair means or by force to have under his
control the fortunate possessor of the great secret, and thus to have
in his possession the means of inexhaustible wealth. Shortly after
this time the emperor Rodolph seized and committed to prison Kelly,
the partner of Dee in this inestimable faculty, and, having once
enlarged him, placed him in custody a second time. Meanwhile Elizabeth
is said to have made him pressing overtures of so flattering a nature
that he determined to escape and return to his native country. For
this purpose he is said to have torn the sheets of his bed, and
twisted them into a rope, that by that means he might descend from
the tower in which he was confined. But, being a corpulent man of
considerable weight, the rope broke with him before he was half way
down, and, having fractured one or both his legs, and being otherwise
considerably bruised, he died shortly afterwards. This happened in
the year 1595.

Dee (according to his own account, delivered to commissioners
appointed by queen Elizabeth to enquire into his circumstances) came
from Trebona to England in a state little inferior to that of an
ambassador. He had three coaches, with four horses harnessed to each
coach, two or three loaded waggons, and a guard, sometimes of six,
and sometimes of twenty-four soldiers, to defend him from enemies,
who were supposed to lie in wait to intercept his passage. Immediately
on his arrival he had an audience of the queen at Richmond, by whom
he was most graciously received. She gave special orders, that he
should do what he would in chemistry and philosophy, and that no one
should on any account molest him.

But here end the prosperity and greatness of this extraordinary man.
If he possessed the power of turning all baser metals into gold, he
certainly acted unadvisedly in surrendering this power to his
confederate, immediately before his return to his native country.
He parted at the same time with his gift of prophecy, since, though
he brought away with him his miraculous stone, and at one time
appointed one Bartholomew, and another one Hickman, his interpreters
to look into the stone, to see the marvellous sights it was expected
to disclose, and to hear the voices and report the words that issued
from it, the experiments proved in both instances abortive. They
wanted the finer sense, or the unparalleled effrontery and
inexhaustible invention, which Kelly alone possessed.

The remainder of the voyage of the life of Dee was "bound in shallows
and in miseries." Queen Elizabeth we may suppose soon found that her
dreams of immense wealth to be obtained through his intervention were
nugatory. Yet would she not desert the favourite of her former years.
He presently began to complain of poverty and difficulties. He
represented that the revenue of two livings he held in the church
had been withheld from him from the time of his going abroad. He
stated that, shortly after that period, his house had been broken
into and spoiled by a lawless mob, instigated by his ill fame as a
dealer in prohibited and unlawful arts. They destroyed or dispersed
his library, consisting of four thousand volumes, seven hundred of
which were manuscripts, and of inestimable rarity. They ravaged his
collection of curious implements and machines. He enumerated the
expences of his journey home by Elizabeth's command, for which he
seemed to consider the queen as his debtor. Elizabeth in consequence
ordered him at several times two or three small sums. But this being
insufficient, she was prevailed upon in 1592 to appoint two members
of her privy council to repair to his house at Mortlake to enquire
into particulars, to whom he made a Compendious Rehearsal of half
a hundred years of his life, accompanied with documents and vouchers.

It is remarkable that in this Rehearsal no mention occurs of the
miraculous stone brought down to him by an angel, or of his
pretensions respecting the transmutation of metals. He merely rests,
his claims to public support upon his literary labours, and the
acknowledged eminence of his intellectual faculties. He passes over
the years he had lately spent in foreign countries, in entire silence,
unless we except his account of the particulars of his journey home.
His representation to Elizabeth not being immediately productive of
all the effects he expected, he wrote a letter to archbishop Whitgift
two years after, lamenting the delay of the expected relief, and
complaining of the "untrue reports, opinions and fables, which had
for so many years been spread of his studies." He represents these
studies purely as literary, frank, and wholly divested of mystery.
If the "True Relation of what passed for many years between Dr. Dee
and certain Spirits" had not been preserved, and afterwards printed,
we might have been disposed to consider all that was said on this
subject as a calumny.

The promotion which Dee had set his heart on, was to the office of
master of St. Cross's Hospital near Winchester, which the queen had
promised him when the present holder should be made a bishop. But
this never happened. He obtained however in lieu of it the
chancellorship of St. Paul's cathedral, 8 December 1594, which in
the following year he exchanged for the wardenship of the college
at Manchester. In this last office he continued till the year 1602
(according to other accounts 1604), during which time he complained
of great dissention and refractoriness on the part of the fellows;
though it may perhaps be doubted whether equal blame may not fairly
be imputed to the arrogance and restlessness of the warden. At length
he receded altogether from public life, and retired to his ancient
domicile at Mortlake. He made one attempt to propitiate the favour
of king James; but it was ineffectual. Elizabeth had known him in
the flower and vigour of his days; he had boasted the uniform
patronage of her chief favourite; he had been recognised by the
philosophical and the learned as inferior to none of their body,
and he had finally excited the regard of his ancient mistress by
his pretence to revelations, and the promises he held out of the
philosopher's stone. She could not shake off her ingrafted prejudice
in his favour; she could not find in her heart to cast him aside in
his old age and decay. But then came a king, to whom in his prosperity
and sunshine he had been a stranger. He wasted his latter days in
dotage, obscurity and universal neglect. No one has told us how he
contrived to subsist. We may be sure that his constant companions
were mortification and the most humiliating privations. He lingered
on till the year 1608; and the ancient people in the time of Antony
Wood, nearly a century afterwards, pointed to his grave in the chancel
of the church at Mortlake, and professed to know the very spot where
his remains were desposited.

The history of Dee is exceedingly interesting, not only on its own
account; not only for the eminence of his talents and attainments,
and the incredible sottishness and blindness of understanding which
marked his maturer years; but as strikingly illustrative of the
credulity and superstitious faith of the time in which he lived. At
a later period his miraculous stone which displayed such wonders,
and was attended with so long a series of supernatural vocal
communications would have deceived nobody: it was scarcely more
ingenious than the idle tricks of the most ordinary conjurer. But
at this period the crust of long ages of darkness had not yet been
fully worn away. Men did not trust to the powers of human
understanding, and were not familiarised with the main canons of
evidence and belief. Dee passed six years on the continent, proceeding
from the court of one prince or potent nobleman to another, listened
to for a time by each, each regarding his oracular communications
with astonishment and alarm, and at length irresolutely casting him
off, when he found little or no difficulty in running a like career
with another.

It is not the least curious circumstance respecting the life of Dee,
that in 1659, half a century after his death, there remained still
such an interest respecting practices of this sort, as to authorise
the printing a folio volume, in a complex and elaborate form, of his
communications with spirits. The book was brought out by Dr. Meric
Casaubon, no contemptible name in the republic of letters. The editor
observes respecting the hero and his achievements in the Preface,
that, "though his carriage in certain respects seemed to lay in works
of darkness, yet all was tendered by him to kings and princes, and
by all (England alone excepted) was listened to for a good while with
good respect, and by some for a long time embraced and entertained."
He goes on to say, that "the fame of it made the pope bestir himself,
and filled all, both learned and unlearned, with great wonder and
astonishment." He adds, that, "as a whole it is undoubtedly not to
be paralleled in its kind in any age or country." In a word the
editor, though disavowing an entire belief in Dee's pretensions, yet
plainly considers them with some degree of deference, and insinuates
to how much more regard such undue and exaggerated pretensions are
entitled, than the impious incredulity of certain modern Sadducees,
who say that "there is no resurrection; neither angel, nor spirit."
The belief in witchcraft and sorcery has undoutedly met with some
degree of favour from this consideration, inasmuch as, by recognising
the correspondence of human beings with the invisible world, it has
one principle in common with the believers in revelation, of which
the more daring infidel is destitute.


EARL OF DERBY.

The circumstances of the death of Ferdinand, fifth earl of Derby,
in 1594, have particularly engaged the attention of the contemporary
historians. Hesket, an emissary of the Jesuits and English Catholics
abroad, was importunate with this nobleman to press his title to the
crown, as the legal representative of his great-grandmother Mary,
youngest daughter to king Henry the Seventh. But the earl, fearing,
as it is said, that this was only a trap to ensnare him, gave
information against Hesket to the government, in consequence of which
he was apprehended, tried and executed. Hesket had threatened the
earl that, if he did not comply with his suggestion, he should live
only a short time. Accordingly, four months afterwards, the earl was
seized with a very uncommon disease. A waxen image was at the same
time found in his chamber with hairs in its belly exactly of the same
colour as those of the earl. [211] The image was, by some zealous
friend of lord Derby, burned; but the earl grew worse. He was himself
thoroughly persuaded that he was bewitched. Stow has inserted in his
Annals a minute account of his disease from day to day, with a
description of all the symptoms.


KING JAMES'S VOYAGE TO NORWAY.

While Elizabeth amused herself with the supernatural gifts to which
Dee advanced his claim, and consoled the adversity and destitution
to which the old man, once so extensively honoured, was now reduced,
a scene of a very different complexion was played in the northern
part of the island. Trials for sorcery were numerous in the reign
of Mary queen of Scots; the comparative darkness and ignorance of
the sister kingdom rendered it a soil still more favourable than
England to the growth of these gloomy superstitions. But the mind
of James, at once inquisitive, pedantic and self-sufficient,
peculiarly fitted him for the pursuit of these narrow-minded and
obscure speculations. One combination of circumstances wrought up
this propensity within him to the greatest height.

James was born in the year 1566. He was the only direct heir to the
crown of Scotland; and he was in near prospect of succession to that
of England. The zeal of the Protestant Reformation had wrought up
the anxiety of men's minds to a fever of anticipation and forecast.
Consequently, towards the end of the reign of Elizabeth, a point which
greatly arrested the general attention was the expected marriage of
the king of Scotland. Elizabeth, with that petty jealousy which
obscured the otherwise noble qualities of her spirit, sought to
countermine this marriage, that her rival and expected successor might
not be additionally graced with the honours of offspring. James fixed
his mind upon a daughter of the king of Denmark. By the successful
cabals of Elizabeth he was baffled in this suit; and the lady was
finally married to the duke of Bavaria. The king of Denmark had
another daughter; and James made proposals to this princess. Still
he was counteracted; till at length he sent a splendid embassy, with
ample powers and instructions, and the treaty was concluded. The
princess embarked; but, when she had now for some time been expected
in Scotland, news was brought instead, that she had been driven back
by tempests on the coast of Norway. The young king felt keenly his
disappointment, and gallantly resolved to sail in person for the port,
where his intended consort was detained by the shattered condition
of her fleet. James arrived on the twenty-second of October 1589,
and having consummated his marriage, was induced by the invitation
of his father-in-law to pass the winter at Copenhagen, from whence
he did not sail till the spring, and, after having encountered a
variety of contrary winds and some danger, reached Edinburgh on the
first of May in the following year.

It was to be expected that variable weather and storms should
characterise the winter-season in these seas. But the storms were
of longer continuance and of more frequent succession, than was
usually known. And at this period, when the proposed consort of James
first, then the king himself, and finally both of them, and the hope
of Protestant succession, were committed to the mercy of the waves,
it is not wonderful that the process of the seasons should be
accurately marked, and that those varieties, which are commonly
ascribed to second causes, should have been imputed to extraordinary
and supernatural interference. It was affirmed that, in the king's
return from Denmark, his ship was impelled by a different wind from
that which acted on the rest of his fleet.

It happened that, soon after James's return to Scotland, one Geillis
Duncan, a servant-maid, for the extraordinary circumstances that
attended certain cures which she performed, became suspected of
witchcraft. Her master questioned her on the subject; but she would
own nothing. Perceiving her obstinacy, the master took upon himself
of his own authority, to extort confession from her by torture. In
this he succeeded; and, having related divers particulars of
witchcraft of herself, she proceeded to accuse others. The persons
she accused were cast into the public prison.

One of these, Agnes Sampson by name, at first stoutly resisted the
torture. But, it being more strenuously applied, she by and by became
extremely communicative. It was at this period that James personally
engaged in the examinations. We are told that he "took great delight
in being present," and putting the proper questions. The unhappy
victim was introduced into a room plentifully furnished with
implements of torture, while the king waited in an apartment at a
convenient distance, till the patient was found to be in a suitable
frame of mind to make the desired communications. No sooner did he
or she signify that they were ready, and should no longer refuse to
answer, than they were introduced, fainting, sinking under recent
sufferings which they had no longer strength to resist, into the royal
presence. And here sat James, in envied ease and conscious "delight,"
wrapped up in the thought of his own sagacity, framing the enquiries
that might best extort the desired evidence, and calculating with
a judgment by no means to be despised, from the bearing, the turn
of features, and the complexion of the victim, the probability whether
he was making a frank and artless confession, or had still the secret
desire to impose on the royal examiner, or from a different motive
was disposed to make use of the treacherous authority which the
situation afforded, to gratify his revenge upon some person towards
whom he might be inspired with latent hatred and malice.

Agnes Sampson related with what solicitude she had sought to possess
some fragment of the linen belonging to the king. If he had worn it,
and it had contracted any soil from his royal person, this would be
enough: she would infallibly, by applying her incantations to this
fragment, have been able to undermine the life of the sovereign. She
told how she with two hundred other witches had sailed in sieves from
Leith to North Berwick church, how they had there encountered the
devil in person, how they had feasted with him, and what obscenities
had been practised. She related that in this voyage they had drowned
a cat, having first baptised him, and that immediately a dreadful
storm had arisen, and in this very storm the king's ship had been
separated from the rest of his fleet. She took James aside, and, the
better to convince him, undertook to repeat to him the conversation,
the dialogue which had passed from the one to the other, between the
king and queen in their bedchamber on the wedding-night. Agnes Sampson
was condemned to the flames.


JOHN FIAN.

Another of the miserable victims on this occasion was John Fian, a
schoolmaster at Tranent near Edinburgh, a young man, whom the ignorant
populace had decorated with the style of doctor. He was tortured by
means of a rope strongly twisted about his head, and by the boots.
He was at length brought to confession. He told of a young girl, the
sister of one of his scholars, with whom he had been deeply enamoured.
He had proposed to the boy to bring him three hairs from the most
secret part of his sister's body, possessing which he should be
enabled by certain incantations to procure himself the love of the
girl. The boy at his mother's instigation brought to Fian three hairs
from a virgin heifer instead; and, applying his conjuration to them,
the consequence had been that the heifer forced her way into his
school, leaped upon him in amorous fashion, and would not be
restrained from following him about the neighbourhood.

This same Fian acted an important part in the scene at North Berwick
church. As being best fitted for the office, he was appointed recorder
or clerk to the devil, to write down the names, and administer the
oaths to the witches. He was actively concerned in the enchantment,
by means of which the king's ship had nearly been lost on his return
from Denmark. This part of his proceeding however does not appear
in his own confession, but in that of the witches who were his
fellow-conspirators.

He further said, that, the night after he made his confession, the
devil appeared to him, and was in a furious rage against him for his
disloyalty to his service, telling him that he should severely repent
his infidelity. According to his own account, he stood firm, and
defied the devil to do his worst. Meanwhile the next night he escaped
out of prison, and was with some difficulty retaken. He however
finally denied all his former confessions, said that they were
falshoods forced from him by mere dint of torture, and, though he
was now once more subjected to the same treatment to such an excess
as must necessarily have crippled him of his limbs for ever, he proved
inflexible to the last. At length by the king's order he was
strangled, and his body cast into the flames. Multitudes of unhappy
men and women perished in this cruel persecution. [212]


KING JAMES'S DEMONOLOGY.

It was by a train of observations and experience like this, that James
was prompted seven years after to compose and publish his Dialogues
on Demonology in Three Books. In the Preface to this book he says,
"The fearfull abounding at this time in this countrey, of these
detestable slaves of the Diuel, the Witches or enchaunters, hath moved
me (beloued Reader) to dispatch in post this following Treatise of
mine, not in any wise (as I protest) to serue for a shew of my
learning and ingine, but onely (moued of conscience) to preasse
thereby, so farre as I can, to resolue the doubting hearts of many,
both that such assaults of Satan are most certainely practised, and
that the instruments thereof merits most seuerely to be punished."

In the course of the treatise he affirms, "that barnes, or wiues,
or neuer so diffamed persons, may serue for sufficient witnesses and
proofes in such trialls; for who but Witches can be prooves, and so
witnesses of the doings of Witches?" [213] But, lest innocent persons
should be accused, and suffer falsely, he tells us, "There are two
other good helps that may be used for their trial: the one is, the
finding of their marke [a mark that the devil was supposed to impress
upon some part of their persons], and the trying the insensibleness
thereof: the other is their fleeting on the water: for, as in a secret
murther, if the dead carkasse be at any time thereafter handled by
the murtherer, it will gush out of bloud, as if the bloud were crying
to the heauen for revenge of the murtherer, God hauing appointed that
secret supernaturall signe, for triall of that secret unnaturall
crime, so it appears that God hath appointed (for a supernaturall
signe of the monstrous impietie of Witches) that the water shall
refuse to receive them in her bosome, that haue shaken off them the
sacred water of Baptisme, and wilfully refused the benefite thereof:
No, not so much as their eyes are able to shed teares (threaten and
torture them as ye please) while first they repent (God not permitting
them to dissemble their obstinacie in so horrible a crime.)" [214]


STATUTE, 1 JAMES I.

In consequence of the strong conviction James entertained on the
subject, the English parliament was induced, in the first year of
his reign, to supersede the milder proceedings of Elizabeth, and to
enact that "if any person shall use, practice, or exercise any
invocation or conjuration of any evil and wicked spirit, or shall
consult, covenant with, entertain, employ, feed or reward any evil
and wicked spirit, to or for any intent and purpose; or take up any
dead man, woman, or child out of their grave, or the skin, bone, or
any part of any dead person, to be used in any manner of witchcraft,
sorcery or enchantment, or shall use any witchcraft, sorcery or
enchantment, whereby any person shall be killed, destroyed, wasted,
consumed, pined or lamed in his or her body, or any part thereof;
that then every such offender, their aiders, abettors and counsellors
shall suffer the pains of death." And upon this statute great numbers
were condemned and executed.


FORMAN AND OTHERS.

There is a story of necromancy which unfortunately makes too prominent
a figure in the history of the court and character of king James the
First. Robert earl of Essex, son of queen Elizabeth's favourite, and
who afterwards became commander in chief of the parliamentary forces
in the civil wars, married lady Frances Howard, a younger daughter
of the earl of Suffolk, the bride and bridegroom being the one
thirteen, the other fourteen years old at the time of the marriage.
The relatives of the countess however, who had brought about the
match, thought it most decorous to separate them for some time, and,
while she remained at home with her friends, the bridegroom travelled
for three or four years on the continent. The lady proved the greatest
beauty of her time, but along with this had the most libertine and
unprincipled dispositions.

The very circumstance that she had vowed her faith at the altar when
she was not properly capable of choice, inspired into the wayward
mind of the countess a repugnance to her husband. He came from the
continent, replete with accomplishments; and we may conclude, from
the figure he afterwards made in the most perilous times, not without
a competent share of intellectual abilities. But the countess shrank
from all advances on his part. He loved retirement, and woed the lady
to scenes most favourable to the development of the affections: she
had been bred in court, and was melancholy and repined in any other
scene. So capricious was her temper, that she is said at the same
time to have repelled the overtures of the accomplished and popular
prince Henry, the heir to the throne.

It happened about this period that a beautiful young man, twenty years
of age, and full of all martial graces, appeared on the stage. King
James was singularly partial to young men who were distinguished for
personal attractions. By an extraordinary accident this person, Robert
Carr by name, in the midst of a court-spectacle, just when it was
his cue to present a buckler with a device to the king, was thrown
from his horse, and broke his leg. This was enough: James naturally
became interested in the misfortune, attached himself to Carr, and
even favoured him again and again with a royal visit during his cure.
Presently the young man became an exclusive favourite; and no honours
and graces could be obtained of the sovereign but by his interference.

This circumstance fixed the wavering mind of the countess of Essex.
Voluptuous and self-willed in her disposition, she would hear of no
one but Carr. But her opportunities of seeing him were both short
and rare. In this emergency she applied to Mrs. Turner, a woman whose
profession it was to study and to accommodate the fancies of such
persons as the countess. Mrs. Turner introduced her to Dr. Forman,
a noted astrologer and magician, and he, by images made of wax, and
various uncouth figures and devices, undertook to procure the love
of Carr to the lady. At the same time he practised against the earl,
that he might become impotent, at least towards his wife. This however
did not satisfy the lady; and having gone the utmost lengths towards
her innamorato, she insisted on a divorce in all the forms, and a
legal marriage with the youth she loved. Carr appears originally to
have had good dispositions; and, while that was the case, had
assiduously cultivated the friendship of Sir Thomas Overbury, one
of the most promising young courtiers of the time. Sir Thomas
earnestly sought to break off the intimacy of Carr with lady Essex,
and told him how utterly ruinous to his reputation and prospects it
would prove, if he married her. But Carr, instead of feeling how much
obliged he was to Overbury for this example of disinterested
friendship, went immediately and told the countess what the young
man said.

From this time the destruction of Overbury was resolved on between
them. He was first committed to the Tower by an arbitrary mandate
of James for refusing an embassage to Russia, next sequestered from
all visitors, and finally attacked with poison, which, after several
abortive attempts, was at length brought to effect. Meanwhile a
divorce was sued for by the countess upon an allegation of impotence;
and another female was said to have been substituted in her room,
to be subjected to the inspection of a jury of matrons in proof of
her virginity. After a lapse of two years the murder was brought to
light, the inferior criminals, Mrs. Turner and the rest, convicted
and executed, and Carr, now earl of Somerset, and his countess, found
guilty, but received the royal pardon.--It is proper to add, in order
to give a just idea of the state of human credulity at this period,
that, Forman having died at the time that his services were deemed
most necessary, one Gresham first, and then a third astrologer and
enchanter were brought forward, to consummate the atrocious projects
of the infamous countess. It is said that she and her second husband
were ultimately so thoroughly alienated from each other, that they
resided for years under the same roof, with the most careful
precautions that they might not by any chance come into each other's
presence. [215]


LATEST IDEAS OF JAMES ON THE SUBJECT.

It is worthy of remark however that king James lived to alter his
mind extremely on the question of witchcraft. He was active in his
observations on the subject; and we are told that "the frequency of
forged possessions which were detected by him wrought such an
alteration in his judgment, that he, receding from what he had written
in his early life, grew first diffident of, and then flatly to deny,
the working of witches and devils, as but falshoods and delusions."
[216]


LANCASHIRE WITCHES.

A more melancholy tale does not occur in the annals of necromancy
than that of the Lancashire witches in 1612. The scene of this story
is in Pendlebury Forest, four or five miles from Manchester,
remarkable for its picturesque and gloomy situation. Such places were
not sought then as now, that they might afford food for the
imagination, and gratify the refined taste of the traveller. They
were rather shunned as infamous for scenes of depredation and murder,
or as the consecrated haunts of diabolical intercourse. Pendlebury
had been long of ill repute on this latter account, when a country
magistrate, Roger Nowel by name, conceived about this time that he
should do a public service, by rooting out a nest of witches, who
rendered the place a terror to all the neighbouring vulgar. The first
persons he seized on were Elizabeth Demdike and Ann Chattox, the
former of whom was eighty years of age, and had for some years been
blind, who subsisted principally by begging, though she had a
miserable hovel on the spot, which she called her own. Ann Chattox
was of the same age, and had for some time been threatened with the
calamity of blindness. Demdike was held to be so hardened a witch,
that she had trained all her family to the mystery; namely, Elizabeth
Device, her daughter, and James and Alison Device, her grandchildren.
In the accusation of Chattox was also involved Ann Redferne, her
daughter. These, together with John Bulcock, and Jane his mother,
Alice Nutter, Catherine Hewit, and Isabel Roby, were successively
apprehended by the diligence of Nowel and one or two neighbouring
magistrates, and were all of them by some means induced, some to make
a more liberal, and others a more restricted confession of their
misdeeds in witchcraft, and were afterwards hurried away to Lancaster
Castle, fifty miles off, to prison. Their crimes were said to have
universally proceeded from malignity and resentment; and it was
reported to have repeatedly happened for poor old Demdike to be led
by night from her habitation into the open air by some member of her
family, when she was left alone for an hour to curse her victim, and
pursue her unholy incantations, and was then sought, and brought again
to her hovel. Her curses never failed to produce the desired effect.

These poor wretches had been but a short time in prison, when
information was given, that a meeting of witches was held on Good
Friday, at Malkin's Tower, the habitation of Elizabeth Device, to
the number of twenty persons, to consult how by infernal machinations
to kill one Covel, an officer, to blow up Lancaster Castle, and
deliver the prisoners, and to kill another man of the name of Lister.
The last was effected. The other plans by some means, we are not told
how, were prevented.

The prisoners were kept in jail till the summer assizes; and in the
mean time it fortunately happened that the poor blind Demdike died
in confinement, and was never brought up to trial.

The other prisoners were severally indicted for killing by witchcraft
certain persons who were named, and were all found guilty. The
principal witnesses against Elizabeth Device were James Device and
Jennet Device, her grandchildren, the latter only nine years of age.
When this girl was put into the witness-box, the grandmother, on
seeing her, set up so dreadful a yell, intermixed with bitter curses,
that the child declared that she could not go on with her evidence,
unless the prisoner was removed. This was agreed to; and both brother
and sister swore, that they had been present, when the devil came
to their grandmother in the shape of a black dog, and asked her what
she desired. She said, the death of John Robinson; when the dog told
her to make an image of Robinson in clay, and after crumble it into
dust, and as fast as the image perished, the life of the victim should
waste away, and in conclusion the man should die. This evidence was
received; and upon such testimony, and testimony like this, ten
persons were led to the gallows, on the twentieth of August, Ann
Chattox of eighty years of age among the rest, the day after the
trials, which lasted two days, were finished. The judges who presided
on these trials were sir James Altham and sir Edward Bromley, barons
of the exchequer. [217]

From the whole of this story it is fair to infer, that these old women
had played at the game of commerce with the devil. It had flattered
their vanity, to make their simpler neighbours afraid of them. To
observe the symptoms of their rustic terror, even of their hatred
and detestation, had been gratifying to them. They played the game
so long, that in an imperfect degree they deceived themselves. Human
passions are always to a certain degree infectious. Perceiving the
hatred of their neighbours, they began to think that they were worthy
objects of detestation and terror, that their imprecations had a real
effect, and their curses killed. The brown horrors of the forest were
favourable to visions; and they sometimes almost believed, that they
met the foe of mankind in the night.--But, when Elizabeth Device
actually saw her grandchild of nine years old placed in the
witness-box, with the intention of consigning her to a public and
an ignominious end, then the reveries of the imagination vanished,
and she deeply felt the reality, that, where she had been somewhat
imposing on the child in devilish sport, she had been whetting the
dagger that was to take her own life, and digging her own grave. It
was then no wonder that she uttered a preternatural yell, and poured
curses from the bottom of her heart. It must have been almost beyond
human endurance, to hear the cry of her despair, and to witness the
curses and the agony in which it vented itself.

Twenty-two years elapsed after this scene, when a wretched man, of
the name of Edmund Robinson, conceived on the same spot the scheme
of making himself a profitable speculation from a similar source.
He trained his son, eleven years of age, and furnished him with the
necessary instructions. He taught him to say that one day in the
fields he had met with two dogs, which he urged on to hunt a hare.
They would not budge; and he in revenge tied them to a bush and
whipped them; when suddenly one of them was transformed into an old
woman and the other into a child, a witch and her imp. This story
succeeded so well, that the father soon after gave out that his son
had an eye that could distinguish a witch by sight, and took him round
to the neighbouring churches, where he placed him standing on a bench
after service, and bade him look round and see what he could observe.
The device, however clumsy, succeeded, and no less than seventeen
persons were apprehended at the boy's selection, and conducted to
Lancaster Castle. These seventeen persons were tried at the assizes,
and found guilty; but the judge, whose name has unfortunately been
lost, unlike sir James Altham and sir Edward Bromley, saw something
in the case that excited his suspicion, and, though the juries had
not hesitated in any one instance, respited the convicts, and sent
up a report of the affair to the government. Twenty-two years on this
occasion had not elapsed in vain. Four of the prisoners were by the
judge's recommendation sent for to the metropolis, and were examined
first by the king's physicians, and then by Charles the First in
person. The boy's story was strictly scrutinised. In fine he confessed
that it was all an imposture; and the whole seventeen received the
royal pardon. [218]


LADY DAVIES.

Eleanor Tuchet, daughter of George lord Audley, married sir John
Davies, an eminent lawyer in the time of James the First, and author
of a poem of considerable merit on the Immortality of the Soul. This
lady was a person of no contemptible talents; but what she seems most
to have valued herself upon, was her gift of prophecy; and she
accordingly printed a book of Strange and Wonderful Predictions. She
professed to receive her prophecies from a spirit, who communicated
to her audibly things about to come to pass, though the voice could
be heard by no other person. Sir John Davies was nominated lord chief
justice of the king's bench in 1626. Before he was inducted into the
office, lady Eleanor, sitting with him on Sunday at dinner, suddenly
burst into a passion of tears. Sir John asked her what made her weep.
To which she replied, "These are your funeral tears." Sir John turned
off the prediction with a merry answer. But in a very few days he
was seized with an apoplexy, of which he presently died. [219]--She
also predicted the death of the duke of Buckingham in the same year.
For this assumption of the gift of prophecy, she was cited before
the high-commission-court and examined in 1634. [220]


EDWARD FAIRFAX.

It is a painful task to record, that Edward Fairfax, the harmonious
and elegant translator of Tasso, prosecuted six of his neighbours
at York assizes in the year 1622, for witchcraft on his children.
"The common facts of imps, fits, and the apparition of the witches,
were deposed against the prisoners." The grand jury found the bill,
and the accused were arraigned. But, we are told, "the judge, having
a certificate of the sober behaviour of the prisoners, directed the
jury so well as to induce them to bring in a verdict of acquittal."
[221] The poet afterwards drew up a bulky argument and narrative in
vindication of his conduct.


DOCTOR LAMB.

Dr. Lamb was a noted sorcerer in the time of Charles the First. The
famous Richard Baxter, in his Certainty of the World of Spirits,
printed in 1691, has recorded an appropriate instance of the
miraculous performances of this man. Meeting two of his acquaintance
in the street, and they having intimated a desire to witness some
example of his skill, he invited them home with him. He then conducted
them into an inner room, when presently, to their no small surprise,
they saw a tree spring up in the middle of the apartment. They had
scarcely ceased wondering at this phenomenon, when in a moment there
appeared three diminutive men, with little axes in their hands for
the purpose of cutting down this tree. The tree was felled; and the
doctor dismissed his guests, fully satisfied of the solidity of his
pretensions. That very night however a tremendous hurricane arose,
causing the house of one of the guests to rock from side to side,
with every appearance that the building would come down, and bury
him and his wife in the ruins. The wife in great terror asked, "Were
you not at Dr. Lamb's to-day?" The husband confessed it was true.
"And did you not bring away something from his house?" The husband
owned that, when the little men felled the tree, he had been idle
enough to pick up some of the chips, and put them in his pocket.
Nothing now remained to be done, but to produce the chips, and get
rid of them as fast as they could. This ceremony performed, the
whirlwind immediately ceased, and the remainder of the night became
perfectly calm and serene.

Dr. Lamb at length became so odious by his reputation for these
infernal practices, that the populace rose upon him in 1640, and tore
him to pieces in the streets.--Nor did the effects of his ill fame
terminate here. Thirteen years after, a woman, who had been his
servant-maid, was apprehended on a charge of witchcraft, was tried,
and in expiation of her crime was executed at Tyburn.


URBAIN GRANDIER.

A few years previously to the catastrophe of Dr. Lamb, there occurred
a scene in France which it is eminently to the purpose of this work
to record. Urbain Grandier, a canon of the church, and a popular
preacher of the town of Loudun in the district of Poitiers, was in
the year 1634 brought to trial upon the accusation of magic. The first
cause of his being thus called in question was the envy of his rival
preachers, whose fame was eclipsed by his superior talents. The second
cause was a libel falsely imputed to him upon cardinal Richelieu,
who with all his eminent qualities had the infirmity of being
inexorable upon the question of any personal attack that was made
upon him. Grandier, beside his eloquence, was distinguished for his
courage and resolution, for the gracefulness of his figure, and the
extraordinary attention he paid to the neatness of his dress and the
decoration of his person, which last circumstance brought upon him
the imputation of being too much devoted to the service of the fair.

About this time certain nuns of the convent of Ursulines at Loudun
were attacked with a disease which manifested itself by very
extraordinary symptoms, suggesting to many the idea that they were
possessed with devils. A rumour was immediately spread that Grandier,
urged by some offence he had conceived against these nuns, was the
author, by the skill he had in the arts of sorcery, of these
possessions. It unfortunately happened, that the same capuchin friar
who assured cardinal Richelieu that Grandier was the writer of the
libel against him, also communicated to him the story of the possessed
nuns, and the suspicion which had fallen on the priest on their
account. The cardinal seized with avidity on this occasion of private
vengeance, wrote to a counsellor of state at Loudun, one of his
creatures, to cause a strict investigation to be made into the charge,
and in such terms as plainly implied that what he aimed at was the
destruction of Grandier.

The trial took place in the month of August 1634; and, according to
the authorised copy of the trial, Grandier was convicted upon the
evidence of Astaroth, a devil of the order of Seraphims, and chief
of the possessing devils, of Easas, of Celsus, of Acaos, of Cedon,
of Asmodeus of the order of thrones, of Alex, of Zabulon, of
Naphthalim, of Cham, of Uriel, and of Achas of the order of
principalities, and sentenced to be burned alive. In other words,
he was convicted upon the evidence of twelve nuns, who, being asked
who they were, gave in these names, and professed to be devils, that,
compelled by the order of the court, delivered a constrained
testimony. The sentence was accordingly executed, and Grandier met
his fate with heroic constancy. At his death an enormous drone fly
was seen buzzing about his head; and a monk, who was present at the
execution, attested that, whereas the devils are accustomed to present
themselves in the article of death to tempt men to deny God their
Saviour, this was Beelzebub, which in Hebrew signifies the God of
flies, come to carry away to hell the soul of the victim. [222]


ASTROLOGY.

The supposed science of astrology is of a nature less tremendous,
and less appalling to the imagination, than the commerce with devils
and evil spirits, or the raising of the dead from the peace of the
tomb to effect certain magical operations, or to instruct the living
as to the events that are speedily to befal them. Yet it is well
worthy of attention in a work of this sort, if for no other reason,
because it has prevailed in almost all nations and ages of the world,
and has been assiduously cultivated by men, frequently of great
talent, and who were otherwise distinguished for the soundness of
their reasoning powers, and for the steadiness and perseverance of
their application to the pursuits in which they engaged.

The whole of the question was built upon the supposed necessary
connection of certain aspects and conjunctions or oppositions of the
stars and heavenly bodies, with the events of the world and the
characters and actions of men. The human mind has ever confessed an
anxiety to pry into the future, and to deal in omens and prophetic
suggestions, and, certain coincidences having occurred however
fortuitously, to deduce from them rules and maxims upon which to build
an anticipation of things to come.

Add to which, it is flattering to the pride of man, to suppose all
nature concerned with and interested in what is of importance to
ourselves. Of this we have an early example in the song of Deborah
in the Old Testament, where, in a fit of pious fervour and exaltation,
the poet exclaims, "They fought from heaven; the stars in their
courses fought against Sisera." [223]

The general belief in astrology had a memorable effect on the history
of the human mind. All men in the first instance have an intuitive
feeling of freedom in the acts they perform, and of consequence of
praise or blame due to them in just proportion to the integrity or
baseness of the motives by which they are actuated. This is in reality
the most precious endowment of man. Hence it comes that the good man
feels a pride and self-complacency in acts of virtue, takes credit
to himself for the independence of his mind, and is conscious of the
worth and honour to which he feels that he has a rightful claim. But,
if all our acts are predetermined by something out of ourselves, if,
however virtuous and honourable are our dispositions, we are overruled
by our stars, and compelled to the acts, which, left to ourselves,
we should most resolutely disapprove, our condition becomes slavery,
and we are left in a state the most abject and hopeless. And, though
our situation in this respect is merely imaginary, it does not the
less fail to have very pernicious results to our characters. Men,
so far as they are believers in astrology, look to the stars, and
not to themselves, for an account of what they shall do, and resign
themselves to the omnipotence of a fate which they feel it in vain
to resist. Of consequence, a belief in astrology has the most
unfavourable tendency as to the morality of man; and, were it not
that the sense of the liberty of our actions is so strong that all
the reasonings in the world cannot subvert it, there would be a fatal
close to all human dignity and all human virtue.


WILLIAM LILLY.

One of the most striking examples of the ascendancy of astrological
faith is in the instance of William Lilly. This man has fortunately
left us a narrative of his own life; and he comes sufficiently near
to our time, to give us a feeling of reality in the transactions in
which he was engaged, and to bring the scenes home to our business
and bosoms.

Before he enters expressly upon the history of his life, he gives
us incidentally an anecdote which merits our attention, as tending
strongly to illustrate the credulity of man at the periods of which
we treat.

Lilly was born in the year 1602. When certain circumstances led his
yet undetermined thoughts to the study of astrology as his principal
pursuit, he put himself in the year 1632 under the tuition of one
Evans, whom he describes as poor, ignorant, drunken, presumptuous
and knavish, but who had a character, as the phrase was, for erecting
a figure, predicting future events, discovering secrets, restoring
stolen goods, and even for raising a spirit when he pleased. Sir
Kenelm Digby was one of the most promising characters of these times,
extremely handsome and graceful in his person, accomplished in all
military exercises, endowed with high intellectual powers, and
indefatigably inquisitive after knowledge. To render him the more
remarkable, he was the eldest son of Everard Digby, who was the most
eminent sufferer for the conspiracy of the Gunpowder Treason.

It was, as it seems, some time before Lilly became acquainted with
Evans, that lord Bothwel and sir Kenelm Digby came to Evans at his
lodgings in the Minories, for the express purpose of desiring him
to shew them a spirit. Sir Kenelm was born in the year 1603; he must
have been therefore at this time a young man, but sufficiently old
to know what he sought, and to choose the subjects of his enquiry
with a certain discretion. Evans consented to gratify the curiosity
of his illustrious visitors. He drew a circle, and placed himself
and the two strangers within the circle. He began his invocations.
On a sudden, Evans was taken away from the others, and found himself,
he knew not how, in Battersea Fields near the Thames. The next morning
a countryman discovered him asleep, and, having awaked him, in answer
to his enquiries told him where he was. Evans in the afternoon sent
a messenger to his wife, to inform her of his safety, and to calm
the apprehensions she might reasonably entertain. Just as the
messenger arrived, sir Kenelm Digby came to the house, curious to
enquire respecting the issue of the adventure of yesterday. Lilly
received this story from Evans; and, having asked him how such an
event came to attend on the experiment, was answered that, in
practising the invocation, he had heedlessly omitted the necessary
suffumigation, at which omission the spirit had taken offence.

Lilly made some progress in astrology under Evans, and practised the
art in minor matters with a certain success; but his ambition led
him to aspire to the highest place in his profession. He made an
experiment to discover a hidden treasure in Westminster Abbey; and,
having obtained leave for that purpose from the bishop of Lincoln,
dean of Westminster, he resorted to the spot with about thirty persons
more, with divining rods. He fixed on the place according to the
rules, and began to dig; but he had not proceeded far, before a
furious storm came on, and he judged it advisable to "dismiss the
demons," and desist. These supernatural assistants, he says, had taken
offence at the number and levity of the persons present; and, if he
had not left off when he did, he had no doubt that the storm would
have grown more and more violent, till the whole structure would have
been laid level with the ground.

He purchased himself a house to which to retire in 1636 at Hersham
near Walton on Thames, having, though originally bred in the lowest
obscurity, twice enriched himself in some degree by marriage. He came
to London with a view to practise his favourite art in 1641; but,
having received a secret monition warning him that he was not yet
sufficiently an adept, he retired again into the country for two
years, and did not finally commence his career till 1644, when he
published a Prophetical Almanac, which he continued to do till about
the time of his death. He then immediately began to rise into
considerable notice. Mrs. Lisle, the wife of one of the commissioners
of the great seal, took to him the urine of Whitlocke, one of the
most eminent lawyers of the time, to consult him respecting the health
of the party, when he informed the lady that the person would recover
from his present disease, but about a month after would be very
dangerously ill of a surfeit, which accordingly happened. He was
protected by the great Selden, who interested himself in his favour;
and he tells us that Lenthal, speaker of the house of commons, was
at all times his friend. He further says of himself that he was
originally partial to king Charles and to monarchy: but, when the
parliament had apparently the upper hand, he had the skill to play
his cards accordingly, and secured his favour with the ruling powers.
Whitlocke, in his Memorials of Affairs in his Own Times, takes
repeated notice of him, says that, meeting him in the street in the
spring of 1645, he enquired of Lilly as to what was likely speedily
to happen, who predicted to him the battle of Naseby, and notes in
1648 that some of his prognostications "fell out very strangely,
particularly as to the king's fall from his horse about this time."
Lilly applied to Whitlocke in favour of his rival, Wharton, the
astrologer, and his prayer was granted, and again in behalf of
Oughtred, the celebrated mathematician.

Lilly and Booker, a brother-astrologer, were sent for in great form,
with a coach and four horses, to the head-quarters of Fairfax at
Windsor, towards the end of the year 1647, when they told the general,
that they were "confident that God would go along with him and his
army, till the great work for which they were ordained was perfected,
which they hoped would be the conquering their and the parliament's
enemies, and a quiet settlement and firm peace over the whole nation."
The two astrologers were sent for in the same state in the following
year to the siege of Colchester, which they predicted would soon fall
into possession of the parliament.

Lilly in the mean while retained in secret his partiality to Charles
the First. Mrs. Whorwood, a lady who was fully in the king's
confidence, came to consult him, as to the place to which Charles
should retire when he escaped from Hampton Court. Lilly prescribed
accordingly; but Ashburnham disconcerted all his measures, and the
king made his inauspicious retreat to the isle of Wight. Afterwards
he was consulted by the same lady, as to the way in which Charles
should proceed respecting the negociations with the parliamentary
commissioners at Newport, when Lilly advised that the king should
sign all the propositions, and come up immediately with the
commissioners to London, in which case Lilly did not doubt that the
popular tide would turn in his favour, and the royal cause prove
triumphant. Finally, he tells us that he furnished the saw and _aqua
fortis_, with which the king had nearly removed the bars of the
window of his prison in Carisbrook Castle, and escaped. But Charles
manifested the same irresolution at the critical moment in this case,
which had before proved fatal to his success. In the year 1649 Lilly
received a pension of one hundred pounds _per annum_ from the
council of state, which, after having been paid him for two years,
he declined to accept any longer. In 1659 he received a present of
a gold chain and medal from Charles X king of Sweden, in acknowledgment
of the respectful mention he had made of that monarch in his almanacs.

Lilly lived to a considerable age, not having died till the year 1681.
In the year 1666 he was summoned before a committee of the house of
commons, on the frivolous ground that, in his Monarchy or No Monarchy
published fifteen years before, he had introduced sixteen plates,
among which was one, the eighth, representing persons digging graves,
with coffins, and other emblems significative of mortality, and, in
the thirteenth, a city in flames. He was asked whether these things
referred to the late plague and fire of London. Lilly replied in a
manner to intimate that they did; but he ingenuously confessed that
he had not known in what year they would happen. He said, that he
had given these emblematical representations without any comment,
that those who were competent might apprehend their meaning, whilst
the rest of the world remained in the ignorance which was their
appointed portion.


MATTHEW HOPKINS.

Nothing can place the credulity of the English nation on the subject
of witchcraft about this time, in a more striking point of view, than
the history of Matthew Hopkins, who, in a pamphlet published in 1647
in his own vindication, assumes to himself the surname of the
Witch-finder. He fell by accident, in his native county of Suffolk,
into contact with one or two reputed witches, and, being a man of
an observing turn and an ingenious invention, struck out for himself
a trade, which brought him such moderate returns as sufficed to
maintain him, and at the same time gratified his ambition by making
him a terror to many, and the object of admiration and gratitude to
more, who felt themselves indebted to him for ridding them of secret
and intestine enemies, against whom, as long as they proceeded in
ways that left no footsteps behind, they felt they had no possibility
of guarding themselves. Hopkins's career was something like that of
Titus Oates in the following reign, but apparently much safer for
the adventurer, since Oates armed against himself a very formidable
party, while Hopkins seemed to assail a few only here and there, who
were poor, debilitated, impotent and helpless.

After two or three successful experiments, Hopkins engaged in a
regular tour of the counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex and
Huntingdonshire. He united to him two confederates, a man named John
Stern, and a woman whose name has not been handed down to us. They
visited every town in their route that invited them, and secured to
them the moderate remuneration of twenty shillings and their expences,
leaving what was more than this to the spontaneous gratitude of those
who should deem themselves indebted to the exertions of Hopkins and
his party. By this expedient they secured to themselves a favourable
reception; and a set of credulous persons who would listen to their
dictates as so many oracles. Being three of them, they were enabled
to play the game into one another's hands, and were sufficiently
strong to overawe all timid and irresolute opposition. In every town
to which they came, they enquired for reputed witches, and having
taken them into custody, were secure for the most part of a certain
number of zealous abettors, who took care that they should have a
clear stage for their experiments. They overawed their helpless
victims with a certain air of authority, as if they had received a
commission from heaven for the discovery of misdeeds. They assailed
the poor creatures with a multitude of questions constructed in the
most artful manner. They stripped them naked, in search for the
devil's marks in different parts of their bodies, which were
ascertained by running pins to the head into those parts, that, if
they were genuine marks, would prove themselves such by their
insensibility. They swam their victims in rivers and ponds, it being
an undoubted fact, that, if the persons accused were true witches,
the water, which was the symbol of admission into the Christian
church, would not receive them into its bosom. If the persons examined
continued obstinate, they seated them in constrained and uneasy
attitudes, occasionally binding them with cords, and compelling them
to remain so without food or sleep for twenty-four hours. They walked
them up and down the room, two taking them under each arm, till they
dropped down with fatigue. They carefully swept the room in which
the experiment was made, that they might keep away spiders and flies,
which were supposed to be devils or their imps in that disguise.

The most plentiful inquisition of Hopkins and his confederates was
in the years 1644, 1645 and 1646. At length there were so many persons
committed to prison upon suspicion of witchcraft, that the government
was compelled to take in hand the affair. The rural magistrates before
whom Hopkins and his confederates brought their victims, were obliged,
willingly or unwillingly, to commit them for trial. A commission was
granted to the earl of Warwick and others to hold a sessions of
jail-delivery against them for Essex at Chelmsford, Lord Warwick was
at this time the most popular nobleman in England. He was appointed
by the parliament lord high admiral during the civil war. He was much
courted by the independent clergy, was shrewd, penetrating and active,
and exhibited a singular mixture of pious demeanour with a vein of
facetiousness and jocularity. With him was sent Dr. Calamy, the most
eminent divine of the period of the Commonwealth, to see (says Baxter
[224]) that no fraud was committed, or wrong done to the parties
accused. It may well be doubted however whether the presence of this
clergyman did not operate unfavourably to the persons suspected. He
preached before the judges. It may readily be believed, considering
the temper of the times, that he insisted much upon the horrible
nature of the sin of witchcraft, which could expect no pardon, either
in this world or the world to come. He sat on the bench with the
judges, and participated in their deliberations. In the result of
this inquisition sixteen persons were hanged at Yarmouth in Norfolk,
fifteen at Chelmsford, and sixty at various places in the county of
Suffolk.

Whitlocke in his Memorials of English Affairs, under the date of 1649,
speaks of many witches being apprehended about Newcastle, upon the
information of a person whom he calls the Witch-finder, who, as his
experiments were nearly the same, though he is not named, we may
reasonably suppose to be Hopkins; and in the following year about
Boston in Lincolnshire. In 1652 and 1653 the same author speaks of
women in Scotland, who were put to incredible torture to extort from
them a confession of what their adversaries imputed to them.

The fate of Hopkins was such us might be expected in similar cases.
The multitude are at first impressed with horror at the monstrous
charges that are advanced. They are seized, as by contagion, with
terror at the mischiefs which seem to impend over them, and from
which no innocence and no precaution appear to afford them sufficient
protection. They hasten, as with an unanimous effort, to avenge
themselves upon these malignant enemies, whom God and man alike
combine to expel from society. But, after a time, they begin to
reflect, and to apprehend that they have acted with too much
precipitation, that they have been led on with uncertain appearances.
They see one victim led to the gallows after another, without stint
or limitation. They see one dying with the most solemn asseverations
of innocence, and another confessing apparently she knows not what,
what is put into her mouth by her relentless persecutors. They see
these victims, old, crazy and impotent, harassed beyond endurance
by the ingenious cruelties that are practised against them. They were
first urged on by implacable hostility and fury, to be satisfied with
nothing but blood. But humanity and remorse also have their turn.
Dissatisfied with themselves, they are glad to point their resentment
against another. The man that at first they hailed as a public
benefactor, they presently come to regard with jealous eyes, and begin
to consider as a cunning impostor, dealing in cool blood with the
lives of his fellow-creatures for a paltry gain, and, still more
horrible, for the lure of a perishable and short-lived fame. The
multitude, we are told, after a few seasons, rose upon Hopkins, and
resolved to subject him to one of his own criterions. They dragged
him to a pond, and threw him into the water for a witch. It seems
he floated on the surface, as a witch ought to do. They then pursued
him with hootings and revilings, and drove him for ever into that
obscurity and ignominy which he had amply merited.


CROMWEL.

There is a story of Cromwel recorded by Echard, the historian, which
well deserves to be mentioned, as strikingly illustrative of the
credulity which prevailed about this period. It takes its date from
the morning of the third of September, 1651, when Cromwel gained the
battle of Worcester against Charles the Second, which he was
accustomed to call by a name sufficiently significant, his "crowning
victory." It is told on the authority of a colonel Lindsey, who is
said to have been an intimate friend of the usurper, and to have been
commonly known by that name, as being in reality the senior captain
in Cromwel's own regiment. "On this memorable morning the general,"
it seems, "took this officer with him to a woodside not far from the
army, and bade him alight, and follow him into that wood, and to take
particular notice of what he saw and heard. After having alighted,
and secured their horses, and walked some little way into the wood,
Lindsey began to turn pale, and to be seized with horror from some
unknown cause. Upon which Cromwel asked him how he did, or how he
felt himself. He answered, that he was in such a trembling and
consternation, that he had never felt the like in all the conflicts
and battles he had ever been engaged in: but whether it proceeded
from the gloominess of the place, or the temperature of his body,
he knew not. 'How now?' said Cromwel, 'What, troubled with the
vapours? Come forward, man.' They had not gone above twenty yards
further, before Lindsey on a sudden stood still, and cried out, 'By
all that is good I am seized with such unaccountable terror and
astonishment, that it is impossible for me to stir one step further.'
Upon which Cromwel called him, 'Fainthearted fool!' and bade him,
'stand there, and observe, or be witness.' And then the general,
advancing to some distance from him, met a grave, elderly man with
a roll of parchment in his hand, who delivered it to Cromwel, and
he eagerly perused it, Lindsey, a little recovered from his fear,
heard several loud words between them: particularly Cromwel said,
'This is but for seven years; I was to have had it for one-and-twenty;
and it must, and shall be so.' The other told him positively, it could
not be for more than seven. Upon which Cromwel cried with great
fierceness, 'It shall however be for fourteen years.' But the other
peremptorily declared, 'It could not possibly be for any longer time;
and, if he would not take it so, there were others that would.' Upon
which Cromwel at last took the parchment: and, returning to Lindsey
with great joy in his countenance, he cried, 'Now, Lindsey, the battle
is our own! I long to be engaged.' Returning out of the wood, they
rode to the army, Cromwel with a resolution to engage as soon as
possible, and the other with a design to leave the army as soon. After
the first charge, Lindsey deserted his post, and rode away with all
possible speed day and night, till he came into the county of Norfolk,
to the house of an intimate friend, one Mr. Thoroughgood, minister
of the parish of Grimstone. Cromwel, as soon as he missed him, sent
all ways after him, with a promise of a great reward to any that
should bring him alive or dead. When Mr. Thoroughgood saw his friend
Lindsey come into his yard, his horse and himself much tired, in a
sort of a maze, he said, 'How now, colonel? We hear there is likely
to be a battle shortly: what, fled from your colours?' 'A battle,'
said the other; 'yes there has been a battle, and I am sure the king
is beaten. But, if ever I strike a stroke for Cromwel again, may I
perish eternally! For I am sure he has made a league with the devil,
and the devil will have him in due time.' Then, desiring his
protection from Cromwel's inquisitors, he went in, and related to
him the story in all its circumstances." It is scarcely necessary
to remind the reader, that Cromwel died on that day seven years,
September the third, 1658.

Echard adds, to prove his impartiality as an historian, "How far
Lindsey is to be believed, and how far the story is to be accounted
incredible, is left to the reader's faith and judgment, and not to
any determination of our own."


DOROTHY MATELEY.

I find a story dated about this period, which, though it does not
strictly belong to the subject of necromancy or dealings with the
devil, seems well to deserve to be inserted in this work. The topic
of which I treat is properly of human credulity; and this infirmity
of our nature can scarcely be more forcibly illustrated than in the
following example. It is recorded by the well-known John Bunyan, in
a fugitive tract of his, entitled the Life and Death of Mr. Badman,
but which has since been inserted in the works of the author in two
volumes folio. In minuteness of particularity and detail it may vie
with almost any story which human industry has collected, and human
simplicity has ever placed upon record.

"There was," says my author, "a poor woman, by name Dorothy Mateley,
who lived at a small village, called Ashover, in the county of Derby.
The way in which she earned her subsistence, was by washing the
rubbish that came from the lead-mines in that neighbourhood through
a sieve, which labour she performed till the earth had passed the
sieve, and what remained was particles and small portions of genuine
ore. This woman was of exceedingly low and coarse habits, and was
noted to be a profane swearer, curser, liar and thief; and her usual
way of asserting things was with an imprecation, as, 'I would I might
sink into the earth, if it be not so,' or, 'I would that God would
make the earth open and swallow me up, if I tell an untruth.'

"Now it happened on the 23rd of March, 1660, [according to our
computation 1661], that she was washing ore on the top of a steep
hill about a quarter of a mile from Ashover, when a lad who was
working on the spot missed two-pence out of his pocket, and
immediately bethought himself of charging Dorothy with the theft.
He had thrown off his breeches, and was working in his drawers.
Dorothy with much seeming indignation denied the charge, and added,
as was usual with her, that she wished the ground might open and
swallow her up, if she had the boy's money.

"One George Hopkinson, a man of good report in Ashover, happened to
pass at no great distance at the time. He stood a while to talk to
the woman. There stood also near the tub a little child, who was
called to by her elder sister to come away. Hopkinson therefore took
the little girl by the hand to lead her to her that called her. But
he had not gone ten yards from Dorothy, when he heard her crying out
for help, and turning back, to his great astonishment he saw the
woman, with her tub and her sieve, twirling round and round, and
sinking at the same time in the earth. She sunk about three yards,
and then stopped, at the same time calling lustily for assistance.
But at that very moment a great stone fell upon her head, and broke
her skull, and the earth fell in and covered her. She was afterwards
digged up, and found about four yards under ground, and the boy's
two pennies were discovered on her person, but the tub and the sieve
had altogether disappeared."


WITCHES HANGED BY SIR MATTHEW HALE.

One of the most remarkable trials that occur in the history of
criminal jurisprudence, was that of Amy Duny and Rose Cullender at
Bury St. Edmund's in the year 1664. Not for the circumstances that
occasioned it; for they were of the coarsest and most vulgar
materials. The victims were two poor, solitary women of the town of
Lowestoft in Suffolk, who had by temper and demeanour rendered
themselves particularly obnoxious to their whole neighbourhood.
Whenever they were offended with any one, and this frequently
happened, they vented their wrath in curses and ill language,
muttered between their teeth, and the sense of which could scarcely
be collected; and ever and anon they proceeded to utter dark
predictions of evil, which should happen in revenge for the ill
treatment they received. The fishermen would not sell them fish; and
the boys in the street were taught to fly from them with horror, or
to pursue them with hootings and scurrilous abuse. The principal
charges against them were, that the children of two families were
many times seized with fits, in which they exclaimed that they saw
Amy Duny and Rose Cullender coming to torment them. They vomited,
and in their vomit were often found pins, and once or twice a
two-penny nail. One or two of the children died; for the accusations
spread over a period of eight years, from 1656 to the time of the
trial. To back these allegations, a waggoner appeared, whose waggon
had been twice overturned in one morning, in consequence of the curses
of one of the witches, the waggon having first run against her hovel,
and materially injured it. Another time the waggon stuck fast in a
gate-way, though the posts on neither side came in contact with the
wheels; and, one of the posts being cut down, the waggon passed easily
along.

This trial, as I have said, was no way memorable for the circumstances
that occasioned it, but for the importance of the persons who were
present, and had a share in the conduct of it. The judge who presided
was sir Matthew Hale, then chief baron of the exchequer, and who had
before rendered himself remarkable for his undaunted resistance to
one of the arbitrary mandates of Cromwel, then in the height of his
power, which was addressed to Hale in his capacity of judge. Hale
was also an eminent author, who had treated upon the abstrusest
subjects, and was equally distinguished for his piety and inflexible
integrity. Another person, who was present, and accidentally took
part in the proceedings, was sir Thomas Browne, the superlatively
eloquent and able author of the Religio Medici. (He likewise took
a part on the side of superstition in the trial of the Lancashire
witches in 1634.) A judge also who assisted at the trial was Keeling,
who afterwards occupied the seat of chief justice.

Sir Matthew Hale apparently paid deep attention to the trial, and
felt much perplexed by the evidence. Seeing sir Thomas Browne in
court, and knowing him for a man of extensive information and vast
powers of intellect, Hale appealed to him, somewhat extrajudicially,
for his thoughts on what had transpired. Sir Thomas gave it as his
opinion that the children were bewitched, and inforced his position
by something that had lately occured in Denmark. Keeling dissented
from this, and inclined to the belief that it might all be practice,
and that there was nothing supernatural in the affair.

The chief judge was cautious in his proceeding. He even refused to
sum up the evidence, lest he might unawares put a gloss of his own
upon any thing that had been sworn, but left it all to the jury. He
told them that the Scriptures left no doubt that there was such a
thing as witchcraft, and instructed them that all they had to do was,
first, to consider whether the children were really bewitched, and
secondly, whether the witchcraft was sufficiently brought home to
the prisoners at the bar. The jury returned a verdict of guilty; and
the two women were hanged on the seventeenth of March 1664, one week
after their trial. The women shewed very little activity during the
trial, and died protesting their innocence. [225]

This trial is particularly memorable for the circumstances that
attended it. It has none of the rust of ages: no obscurity arises
from a long vista of years interposed between. Sir Matthew Hale and
sir Thomas Browne are eminent authors; and there is something in such
men, that in a manner renders them the contemporaries of all times,
the living acquaintance of successive ages of the world. Names
generally stand on the page of history as mere abstract idealities;
but in the case of these men we are familiar with their tempers and
prejudices, their virtues and vices, their strength and their
weakness.

They proceed in the first place upon the assumption that there is
such a thing as witchcraft, and therefore have nothing to do but with
the cogency or weakness of evidence as applied to this particular
case. Now what are the premises on which they proceed in this
question? They believe in a God, omniscient, all wise, all powerful,
and whose "tender mercies are over all his works." They believe in
a devil, awful almost as God himself, for he has power nearly
unlimited, and a will to work all evil, with subtlety, deep reach
of thought, vigilant, "walking about, seeking whom he may devour."
This they believe, for they refer to "the Scriptures, as confirming
beyond doubt that there is such a thing as witchcraft." Now what
office do they assign to the devil, "the prince of the power of the
air," at whose mighty attributes, combined with his insatiable
malignity, the wisest of us might well stand aghast? It is the first
law of sound sense and just judgment,

  --_servetur ad imum,
  Qualis ab incoepto processerit, et sibi constet_;

that every character which we place on the scene of things should
demean himself as his beginning promises, and preserve a consistency
that, to a mind sufficiently sagacious, should almost serve us in
lieu of the gift of prophecy. And how is this devil employed according
to sir Matthew Hale and sir Thomas Browne? Why in proffering himself
as the willing tool of the malice of two doting old women. In
afflicting with fits, in causing them to vomit pins and nails, the
children of the parents who had treated the old women with barbarity
and cruelty. In judgment upon these women sit two men, in some
respects the most enlightened of an age that produced Paradise Lost,
and in confirmation of this blessed creed two women are executed in
cool blood, in a country which had just achieved its liberties under
the guidance and the virtues of Hampden.

What right we have in any case to take away the life of a human being
already in our power, and under the forms of justice, is a problem,
one of the hardest that can be proposed for the wit of man to solve.
But to see some of the wisest of men, sitting in judgment upon the
lives of two human creatures in consequence of the forgery and tricks
of a set of malicious children, as in this case undoubtedly it was,
is beyond conception deplorable. Let us think for a moment of the
inexpressible evils which a man encounters when dragged from his
peaceful home under a capital accusation, of his arraignment in open
court, of the orderly course of the evidence, and of the sentence
awarded against him, of the "damned minutes and days he counts over"
from that time to his execution, of his being finally brought forth
before a multitude exasperated by his supposed crimes, and his being
cast out from off the earth as unworthy so much as to exist among
men, and all this being wholly innocent. The consciousness of
innocence a hundred fold embitters the pang. And, if these poor women
were too obtuse of soul entirely to feel the pang, did that give their
superiors a right to overwhelm and to crush them?


WITCHCRAFT IN SWEDEN.

The story of witchcraft, as it is reported to have passed in Sweden
in the year 1670, and has many times been reprinted in this country,
is on several accounts one of the most interesting and deplorable
that has ever been recorded. The scene lies in Dalecarlia, a country
for ever memorable as having witnessed some of the earliest adventures
of Gustavus Vasa, his deepest humiliation, and the first commencement
of his prosperous fortune. The Dalecarlians are represented to us
as the simplest, the most faithful, and the bravest of the sons of
men, men undebauched and unsuspicious, but who devoted themselves
in the most disinterested manner for a cause that appeared to them
worthy of support, the cause of liberty and independence against the
cruelest of tyrants. At least such they were in 1520, one hundred
and fifty years before the date of the story we are going to
recount.--The site of these events was at Mohra and Elfdale in the
province that has just been mentioned.

The Dalecarlians, simple and ignorant, but of exemplary integrity
and honesty, who dwelt amidst impracticable mountains and spacious
mines of copper and iron, were distinguished for superstition among
the countries of the north, where all were superstitious. They were
probably subject at intervals to the periodical visitation of alarms
of witches, when whole races of men became wild with the infection
without any one's being well able to account for it.

In the year 1670, and one or two preceding years, there was a great
alarm of witches in the town of Mohra. There were always two or three
witches existing in some of the obscure quarters of this place. But
now they increased in number, and shewed their faces with the utmost
audacity. Their mode on the present occasion was to make a journey
through the air to Blockula, an imaginary scene of retirement, which
none but the witches and their dupes had ever seen. Here they met
with feasts and various entertainments, which it seems had particular
charms for the persons who partook of them. The witches used to go
into a field in the environs of Mohra, and cry aloud to the devil
in a peculiar sort of recitation, "Antecessor, come and carry us to
Blockula!" Then appeared a multitude of strange beasts, men, spits,
posts, and goats with spits run through their entrails and projecting
behind that all might have room. The witches mounted these beasts
of burthen or vehicles, and were conveyed through the air over high
walls and mountains, and through churches and chimneys, without
perceptible impediment, till they arrived at the place of their
destination. Here the devil feasted them with various compounds and
confections, and, having eaten to their hearts' content, they danced,
and then fought. The devil made them ride on spits, from which they
were thrown; and the devil beat them with the spits, and laughed at
them. He then caused them to build a house to protect them against
the day of judgment, and presently overturned the walls of the house,
and derided them again. All sorts of obscenities were reported to
follow upon these scenes. The devil begot on the witches sons and
daughters: this new generation intermarried again, and the issue of
this further conjunction appears to have been toads and serpents.
How all this pedigree proceeded in the two or three years in which
Blockula had ever been heard of, I know not that the witches were
ever called on to explain.

But what was most of all to be deplored, the devil was not content
with seducing the witches to go and celebrate this infernal sabbath;
he further insisted that they should bring the children of Mohra along
with them. At first he was satisfied, if each witch brought one; but
now he demanded that each witch should bring six or seven for her
quota. How the witches managed with the minds of the children we are
at a loss to guess. These poor, harmless innocents, steeped to the
very lips in ignorance and superstition, were by some means kept in
continual alarm by the wicked, or, to speak more truly, the insane
old women, and said as their prompters said. It does not appear that
the children ever left their beds, at the time they reported they
had been to Blockula. Their parents watched them with fearful anxiety.
At a certain time of the night the children were seized with a strange
shuddering, their limbs were agitated, and their skins covered with
a profuse perspiration. When they came to themselves, they related
that they had been to Blockula, and the strange things they had seen,
similar to what had already been described by the women. Three hundred
children of various ages are said to have been seized with this
epidemic.

The whole town of Mohra became subject to the infection, and were
overcome with the deepest affliction. They consulted together, and
drew up a petition to the royal council at Stockholm, intreating that
they would discover some remedy, and that the government would
interpose its authority to put an end to a calamity to which otherwise
they could find no limit. The king of Sweden was at that time Charles
the Eleventh, father of Charles the Twelfth, and was only fourteen
years of age. His council in their wisdom deputed two commissioners
to Mohra, and furnished them with powers to examine witnesses, and
to take whatever proceedings they might judge necessary to put an
end to so unspeakable a calamity.

They entered on the business of their commission on the thirteenth
of August, the ceremony having been begun with two sermons in the
great church of Mohra, in which we may be sure the damnable sin of
witchcraft was fully dilated on, and concluding with prayers to
Almighty God that in his mercy he would speedily bring to an end the
tremendous misfortune, with which for their sins he had seen fit to
afflict the poor people of Mohra. The next day they opened their
commission. Seventy witches were brought before them. They were all
at first stedfast in their denial, alleging that the charges were
wantonly brought against them, solely from malice and ill will. But
the judges were earnest in pressing them, till at length first one,
and then another; burst into tears, and confessed all. Twenty-three
were prevailed on thus to disburthen their consciences; but nearly
the whole, as well those who owned the justice of their sentence,
as those who protested their innocence to the last, were executed.
Fifteen children confessed their guilt, and were also executed.
Thirty-six other children (who we may infer did not confess), between
the ages of nine and sixteen, were condemned to run the gauntlet,
and to be whipped on their hands at the church-door every Sunday for
a year together. Twenty others were whipped on their hands for three
Sundays. [226]

This is certainly a very deplorable scene, and is made the more so
by the previous character which history has impressed on us, of the
simplicity, integrity, and generous love of liberty of the
Dalecarlians. For the children and their parents we can feel nothing
but unmingled pity. The case of the witches is different. That three
hundred children should have been made the victims of this imaginary
witchcraft is doubtless a grievous calamity. And that a number of
women should have been found so depraved and so barbarous, as by their
incessant suggestions to have practised on the minds of these
children, so as to have robbed them of sober sense, to have frightened
them into fits and disease, and made them believe the most odious
impossibilities, argued a most degenerate character, and well merited
severe reprobation, but not death. Add to which, many of these women
may be believed innocent, otherwise a great majority of those who
were executed, would not have died protesting their entire freedom
from what was imputed to them. Some of the parents no doubt, from
folly and ill judgment, aided the alienation of mind in their children
which they afterwards so deeply deplored, and gratified their
senseless aversion to the old women, when they were themselves in
many cases more the real authors of the evil than those who suffered.


WITCHCRAFT IN NEW ENGLAND.

As a story of witchcraft, without any poetry in it, without any thing
to amuse the imagination, or interest the fancy, but hard, prosy,
and accompanied with all that is wretched, pitiful and withering,
perhaps the well known story of the New England witchcraft surpasses
every thing else upon record. The New Englanders were at this time,
towards the close of the seventeenth century, rigorous Calvinists,
with long sermons and tedious monotonous prayers, with hell before
them for ever on one side, and a tyrannical, sour and austere God
on the other, jealous of an arbitrary sovereignty, who hath "mercy
on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth." These
men, with long and melancholy faces, with a drawling and sanctified
tone, and a carriage that would "at once make the most severely
disposed merry, and the most cheerful spectators sad," constituted
nearly the entire population of the province of Massachuset's Bay.

The prosecutions for witchcraft continued with little intermission
principally at Salem, during the greater part of the year 1692. The
accusations were of the most vulgar and contemptible sort, invisible
pinchings and blows, fits, with the blastings and mortality of cattle,
and wains stuck fast in the ground, or losing their wheels. A
conspicuous feature in nearly the whole of these stories was what
they named the "spectral sight;" in other words, that the profligate
accusers first feigned for the most part the injuries they received,
and next saw the figures and action of the persons who inflicted them,
when they were invisible to every one else. Hence the miserable
prosecutors gained the power of gratifying the wantonness of their
malice, by pretending that they suffered by the hand of any one whose
name first presented itself, or against whom they bore an ill will.
The persons so charged, though unseen by any but the accuser, and
who in their corporal presence were at a distance of miles, and were
doubtless wholly unconscious of the mischief that was hatching against
them, were immediately taken up, and cast into prison. And what was
more monstrous and incredible, there stood at the bar the prisoner
on trial for his life, while the witnesses were permitted to swear
that his spectre had haunted them, and afflicted them with all manner
of injuries. That the poor prosecuted wretch stood astonished at what
was alleged against him, was utterly overwhelmed with the charges,
and knew not what to answer, was all of it interpreted as so many
presumptions of his guilt. Ignorant as they were, they were unhappy
and unskilful in their defence; and, if they spoke of the devil, as
was but natural, it was instantly caught at as a proof how familiar
they were with the fiend that had seduced them to their damnation.

The first specimen of this sort of accusation in the present instance
was given by one Paris, minister of a church at Salem, in the end
of the year 1691, who had two daughters, one nine years old, the other
eleven, that were afflicted with fits and convulsions. The first
person fixed on as the mysterious author of what was seen, was Tituba,
a female slave in the family, and she was harassed by her master into
a confession of unlawful practices and spells. The girls then fixed
on Sarah Good, a female known to be the victim of a morbid melancholy,
and Osborne, a poor man that had for a considerable time been bed-rid,
as persons whose spectres had perpetually haunted and tormented them:
and Good was twelve months after hanged on this accusation.

A person, who was one of the first to fall under the imputation, was
one George Burroughs, also a minister of Salem. He had, it seems,
buried two wives, both of whom the busy gossips said he had used ill
in their life-time, and consequently, it was whispered, had murdered
them. This man was accustomed foolishly to vaunt that he knew what
people said of him in his absence; and this was brought as a proof
that he dealt with the devil. Two women, who were witnesses against
him, interrupted their testimony with exclaiming that they saw the
ghosts of the murdered wives present (who had promised them they would
come), though no one else in the court saw them; and this was taken
in evidence. Burroughs conducted himself in a very injudicious way
on his trial; but, when he came to be hanged, made so impressive a
speech on the ladder, with fervent protestations of innocence, as
melted many of the spectators into tears.

The nature of accusations of this sort is ever found to operate like
an epidemic. Fits and convulsions are communicated from one subject
to another. The "spectral sight," as it was called, is obviously a
theme for the vanity of ignorance. "Love of fame," as the poet
teaches, is an "universal passion." Fame is placed indeed on a height
beyond the hope of ordinary mortals. But in occasional instances it
is brought unexpectedly within the reach of persons of the coarsest
mould; and many times they will be apt to seize it with proportionable
avidity. When too such things are talked of, when the devil and
spirits of hell are made familiar conversation, when stories of this
sort are among the daily news, and one person and another, who had
a little before nothing extraordinary about them, become subjects
of wonder, these topics enter into the thoughts of many, sleeping
and waking: "their young men see visions, and their old men dream
dreams."

In such a town as Salem, the second in point of importance in the
colony, such accusations spread with wonderful rapidity. Many were
seized with fits, exhibited frightful contortions of their limbs and
features, and became a fearful spectacle to the bystander. They were
asked to assign the cause of all this; and they supposed, or pretended
to suppose, some neighbour, already solitary and afflicted, and on
that account in ill odour with the townspeople, scowling upon,
threatening, and tormenting them. Presently persons, specially gifted
with the "spectral sight," formed a class by themselves, and were
sent about at the public expence from place to place, that they might
see what no one else could see. The prisons were filled with the
persons accused. The utmost horror was entertained, as of a calamity
which in such a degree had never visited that part of the world. It
happened, most unfortunately, that Baxter's Certainty of the World
of Spirits had been published but the year before, and a number of
copies had been sent out to New England. There seemed a strange
coincidence and sympathy between vital Christianity in its most
honourable sense, and the fear of the devil, who appeared to be "come
down unto them, with great wrath." Mr. Increase Mather, and Mr. Cotton
Mather, his son, two clergymen of highest reputation in the
neighbourhood, by the solemnity and awe with which they treated the
subject, and the earnestness and zeal which they displayed, gave a
sanction to the lowest superstition and virulence of the ignorant.

All the forms of justice were brought forward on this occasion. There
was no lack of judges, and grand juries, and petty juries, and
executioners, and still less of prosecutors and witnesses. The first
person that was hanged was on the tenth of June, five more on the
nineteenth of July, five on the nineteenth of August, and eight on
the twenty-second of September. Multitudes confessed that they were
witches; for this appeared the only way for the accused to save their
lives. Husbands and children fell down on their knees, and implored
their wives and mothers to own their guilt. Many were tortured by
being tied neck and heels together, till they confessed whatever was
suggested to them. It is remarkable however that not one persisted
in her confession at the place of execution.

The most interesting story that occurred in this affair was of Giles
Cory, and Martha, his wife. The woman was tried on the ninth of
September, and hanged on the twenty-second. In the interval, on the
sixteenth, the husband was brought up for trial. He said, he was not
guilty; but, being asked how he would be tried? he refused to go
through the customary form, and say, "By God and my country." He
observed that, of all that had been tried, not one had as yet been
pronounced not guilty; and he resolutely refused in that mode to
undergo a trial. The judge directed therefore that, according to the
barbarous mode prescribed in the mother-country, he should be laid
on his back, and pressed to death with weights gradually accumulated
on the upper surface of his body, a proceeding which had never yet
been resorted to by the English in North America. The man persisted
in his resolution, and remained mute till he expired.

The whole of this dreadful tragedy was kept together by a thread.
The spectre-seers for a considerable time prudently restricted their
accusations to persons of ill repute, or otherwise of no consequence
in the community. By and by however they lost sight of this caution,
and pretended they saw the figures of some persons well connected,
and of unquestioned honour and reputation, engaged in acts of
witchcraft. Immediately the whole fell through in a moment. The
leading inhabitants presently saw how unsafe it would be to trust
their reputations and their lives to the mercy of these profligate
accusers. Of fifty-six bills of indictment that were offered to the
grand-jury on the third of January, 1693, twenty-six only were found
true bills, and thirty thrown out. On the twenty-six bills that were
found, three persons only were pronounced guilty by the petty jury,
and these three received their pardon from the government. The prisons
were thrown open; fifty confessed witches, together with two hundred
persons imprisoned on suspicion, were set at liberty, and no more
accusations were heard of. The "afflicted," as they were technically
termed, recovered their health; the "spectral sight" was universally
scouted; and men began to wonder how they could ever have been the
victims of so horrible a delusion. [227]




CONCLUSION.


The volume of records of supposed necromancy and witchcraft is
sufficiently copious, without its being in any way necessary to trace
it through its latest relics and fragments. Superstition is so
congenial to the mind of man, that, even in the early years of the
author of the present volume, scarcely a village was unfurnished with
an old man or woman who laboured under an ill repute on this score;
and I doubt not many remain to this very day. I remember, when a
child, that I had an old woman pointed out to me by an ignorant
servant-maid, as being unquestionably possessed of the ominous gift
of the "evil eye," and that my impulse was to remove myself as quickly
as might be from the range of her observation.

But witchcraft, as it appears to me, is by no means so desirable a
subject as to make one unwilling to drop it. It has its uses. It is
perhaps right that we should be somewhat acquainted with this
repulsive chapter in the annals of human nature. As the wise man says
in the Bible, "It is good for us to resort to the house of those that
mourn;" for there is a melancholy which is attended with beneficial
effects, and "by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made
better." But I feel no propensity to linger in these dreary abodes,
and would rather make a speedy exchange for the dwellings of
healthfulness and a certain hilarity. We will therefore with the
reader's permission at length shut the book, and say, "Lo, it is
enough."

There is no time perhaps at which we can more fairly quit the subject,
than when the more enlightened governments of Europe have called for
the code of their laws, and have obliterated the statute which annexed
the penalty of death to this imaginary crime.

So early as the year 1672, Louis XIV promulgated an order of the
council of state, forbidding the tribunals from proceeding to judgment
in cases where the accusation was of sorcery only. [228]

In England we paid a much later tribute to the progress of
illumination and knowledge; and it was not till the year 1736 that
a statute was passed, repealing the law made in the first year of
James I, and enacting that no capital prosecution should for the
future take place for conjuration, sorcery and enchantment, but
restricting the punishment of persons pretending to tell fortunes
and discover stolen goods by witchcraft, to that appertaining to a
misdemeanour.

As long as death could by law be awarded against those who were
charged with a commerce with evil spirits, and by their means
inflicting mischief on their species, it is a subject not unworthy
of grave argument and true philanthropy, to endeavour to detect the
fallacy of such pretences, and expose the incalculable evils and the
dreadful tragedies that have grown out of accusations and prosecutions
for such imaginary crimes. But the effect of perpetuating the silly
and superstitious tales that have survived this mortal blow, is
exactly opposite. It only serves to keep alive the lingering folly
of imbecile minds, and still to feed with pestiferous clouds the
thoughts of the ignorant. Let us rather hail with heart-felt gladness
the light which has, though late, broken in upon us, and weep over
the calamity of our forefathers, who, in addition to the inevitable
ills of our sublunary state, were harassed with imaginary terrors,
and haunted by suggestions,

  Whose horrid image did unfix their hair,
  And make their seated hearts knock at their ribs,
  Against the use of nature.




THE END.




ST. LEON,

“_I took her hand and by my caresses endeavoured to soothe and compose
her._” _Page 65._

_London, Published by Henry Colburn & Richard Bentley, 1831._]




                               ST. LEON,

                                  BY
                            WILLIAM GODWIN.

             [Illustration: _He put his hand to the wound;
                 the Animal stirred not._ _Page 273._]

                                LONDON.
                         COLBURN AND BENTLEY,
                        NEW BURLINGTON STREET.
                                 1831.




                               ST. LEON:

                                   A
                    TALE OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

                                  BY
                            WILLIAM GODWIN.

          Ferdinand Mendez Pinto was but a type of thee, thou
            liar of the first magnitude.          CONGREVE.

                                LONDON:
                  HENRY COLBURN AND RICHARD BENTLEY,
                        NEW BURLINGTON STREET;
                     BELL AND BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH
                         AND CUMMING, DUBLIN.
                                 1831.

                                LONDON:
                   Printed by A. & R. Spottiswoode,
                          New-Street-Square.




PREFACE.


The following passage from a work, said to be written by the late Dr.
John Campbel, and entitled _Hermippus Redivivus_, suggested the first
hint of the present performance:--

“There happened in the year 1687, an odd accident at Venice, that
made a very great stir then, and which I think deserves to be rescued
from oblivion. The great freedom and ease with which all persons, who
make a good appearance, live in that city, is known sufficiently to
all who are acquainted with it; such will not therefore be surprised,
that a stranger, who went by the name of signor Gualdi, and who made a
considerable figure there, was admitted into the best company, though
nobody knew who or what he was. He remained at Venice for some months;
and three things were remarked in his conduct. The first was, that he
had a small collection of fine pictures, which he readily showed to any
body that desired it; the next, that he was perfectly versed in all
arts and sciences, and spoke on every subject with such readiness and
sagacity, as astonished all who heard him; and it was, in the third
place, observed, that he never wrote or received any letter, never
desired any credit, or made use of bills of exchange, but paid for
every thing in ready money and lived decently, though not in splendour.

“This gentleman met one day at the coffee-house with a Venetian
nobleman, who was an extraordinary good judge of pictures: he had heard
of signor Gualdi’s collection, and in a very polite manner desired to
see them, to which the other very readily consented. After the Venetian
had viewed signor Gualdi’s collection, and expressed his satisfaction,
by telling him that he had never seen a finer, considering the number
of pieces of which it consisted; he cast his eye by chance over the
chamber-door, where hung a picture of this stranger. The Venetian
looked upon it, and then upon him. ‘This picture was drawn for you,
sir,’ says he to signor Gualdi, to which the other made no answer,
but by a low bow. ‘You look,’ continued the Venetian, ‘like a man of
fifty, and yet I know this picture to be of the hand of Titian, who has
been dead one hundred and thirty years, how is this possible?’--‘It is
not easy,’ said signor Gualdi, gravely, ‘to know all things that are
possible; but there is certainly no crime in my being like a picture
drawn by Titian.’ The Venetian easily perceived, by his manner of
speaking, that he had given the stranger offence, and therefore took
his leave.

“He could not forbear speaking of this in the evening to some of his
friends, who resolved to satisfy themselves by looking upon the picture
the next day. In order to have an opportunity of doing so, they went
to the coffee-house about the time that signor Gualdi was wont to come
thither; and not meeting with him, one of them, who had often conversed
with him, went to his lodgings to enquire after him, where he heard,
that he had set out an hour before for Vienna. This affair made a great
noise, and found a place in all the newspapers of that time.”[1]

It is well known that the philosopher’s stone, the art of transmuting
metals into gold, and the _elixir vitæ_, which was to restore youth,
and make him that possessed it immortal; formed a principal object of
the studies of the curious for centuries. Many stories, beside this of
signor Gualdi, have been told, of persons who were supposed to be in
possession of those wonderful secrets, in search of which hundreds of
unfortunate adventurers wasted their fortunes and their lives.

It has been said of Shakespear, that he

    Exhausted worlds, and then imagined new[2]:

but the burthen sustained by Shakespear was too heavy for the shoulders
of any other individual. I leave the first part of the task above
mentioned to be divided among those celebrated novelists, living and
dead, who have attempted to delineate the scenes of real life. In
this little work I have endeavoured to gain footing in one neglected
track of the latter province. The hearts and the curiosity of readers
have been assailed in so many ways, that we, writers who bring up the
rear of our illustrious predecessors, must be contented to arrive at
novelty in whatever mode we are able. The foundation of the following
tale is such as, it is not to be supposed, ever existed. But, if I have
mixed human feelings and passions with incredible situations, and thus
rendered them impressive and interesting, I shall entertain some hope
to be pardoned the boldness and irregularity of my design.

Some readers of my graver productions will perhaps, in perusing
these little volumes, accuse me of inconsistency; the affections and
charities of private life being every where in this publication a topic
of the warmest eulogium, while in the Enquiry concerning Political
Justice they seemed to be treated with no great degree of indulgence
and favour. In answer to this objection, all I think it necessary
to say on the present occasion is, that, for more than four years,
I have been anxious for opportunity and leisure to modify some of
the earlier chapters of that work in conformity to the sentiments
inculcated in this. Not that I see cause to make any change respecting
the principle of justice, or any thing else fundamental to the system
there delivered; but that I apprehend domestic and private affections
inseparable from the nature of man, and from what may be styled
the culture of the heart, and am fully persuaded that they are not
incompatible with a profound and active sense of justice in the mind of
him that cherishes them. True wisdom will recommend to us individual
attachments; for with them our minds are more thoroughly maintained in
activity and life than they can be under the privation of them; and it
is better that man should be a living being, than a stock or a stone.
True virtue will sanction this recommendation; since it is the object
of virtue to produce happiness, and since the man who lives in the
midst of domestic relations will have many opportunities of conferring
pleasure, minute in the detail, yet not trivial in the amount, without
interfering with the purposes of general benevolence. Nay, by kindling
his sensibility, and harmonising his soul, they may be expected, if he
is endowed with a liberal and manly spirit, to render him more prompt
in the service of strangers and the public.

Nov. 26, 1799.




TRAVELS OF ST. LEON.




CHAPTER I.


There is nothing that human imagination can figure brilliant and
enviable, that human genius and skill do not aspire to realize. In the
early ages of antiquity, one of the favourite topics of speculation was
a perfect system of civil policy; and no sooner had Plato delineated
his imaginary republic, than he sought for a spot of earth upon which
to execute his plan. In my own times, and for upwards of a century
before them, the subject which has chiefly occupied men of intrepid
and persevering study, has been the great secret of nature, the
_opus magnum_, in its two grand and inseparable branches, the art of
multiplying gold, and of defying the inroads of infirmity and death.

It is notorious that uncommon talents and unparalleled industry have
been engaged in this mighty task. It has, I know, been disputed by the
audacious adversaries of all sober and reasonable evidence, whether
these talents and industry have in any case attained the object they
sought. It is not to my purpose to ascertain the number of those whose
victory over the powers and inertness of matter has been complete. It
is enough that I am a living instance of the existence of such men. To
these two secrets, if they are to be considered as two, I have been
for years in the habit of resorting for my gratification. I have in my
possession the choice of being as wealthy as I please, and the gift of
immortal life. Every thing that I see almost, I can without difficulty
make my own; for what palaces, pictures, parks or gardens, rarities of
art or nature, have not a price at which their owner will consent to
yield them? The luxuries of every quarter of the world are emptied at
my feet. I can command, to an extent almost inconceivable, the passions
of men. What heart can withstand the assault of princely magnificence?
What man is inaccessible to a bribe? Add to these advantages, that I am
invulnerable to disease. Every sun that rises, finds the circulations
of my frame in the most perfect order. Decrepitude can never approach
me. A thousand winters want the power to furrow my countenance with
wrinkles, or turn my hairs to silver. Exhaustless wealth and eternal
youth are the attributes by which I am distinguished from the rest of
mankind.

I do not sit down now to write a treatise of natural philosophy. The
condition by which I hold my privileges is, that they must never be
imparted. I sit down purely to relate a few of those extraordinary
events that have been produced, in the period of my life which is
already elapsed, by the circumstances and the peculiarity to which I
have just alluded.

It is so obvious, as to make it almost improper to specify it, that
the pursuit in which so many of my contemporaries are engaged, and
the end of which I have so singularly achieved, is in its appearance
infinitely more grand and interesting than that which occupied the
thoughts of Plato and the most eminent writers of antiquity. What is
political liberty compared with unbounded riches and immortal vigour?
The immediate application of political liberty is, to render a man’s
patrimony or the fruits of his industry completely his own, and to
preserve them from the invasion of others. But the petty detail of
preservation or gradual acquisition can never enter into competition
with the _great secret_, which endows a man in a moment with every
thing that the human heart can wish. Considered in this light, how mean
and contemptible does the ambition of the boasted ancients appear,
compared with ours? What adept or probationer of the present day would
be content to resign the study of God and the profounder secrets
of nature, and to bound his ardour to the investigation of his own
miserable existence?

It may seem perhaps to many, that the history of a person possessed
of advantages so unparalleled as mine, must be, like the history
of paradise, or of the future happiness of the blessed, too calm
and motionless, too much of one invariable texture and exempt from
vicissitude, to excite the attention or interest the passions of the
reader. If he will have patience, and apply to the perusal of my
narrative, he will in no long time perceive how far his conjecture is
founded in sagacity and reason.

Some persons may be curious to know what motives can have induced a
man of such enormous wealth, and so every way qualified to revel in
delights, to take the trouble of penning his memoirs. The immortality
with which I am endowed seems to put out of the question the common
motives that relate to posthumous fame.

The curiosity here mentioned, if it really exists, I cannot consent to
gratify. I will anticipate nothing. In the progress of my story, my
motive for recording it will probably become evident.

I am descended from one of the most ancient and honourable families
of the kingdom of France. I was the only child of my father, who died
while I was an infant. My mother was a woman of rather a masculine
understanding, and full of the prejudices of nobility and magnificence.
Her whole soul was in a manner concentrated in the ambition to render
me the worthy successor of the counts de St. Leon, who had figured
with distinguished reputation in the wars of the Holy Land. My father
had died fighting gallantly in the plains of Italy under the standard
of Louis the Twelfth; a prince whose name was never repeated to me
unaccompanied with the praises due to his military prowess, and to
the singular humanity of disposition by which he acquired the title
of _The father of his people_. My mother’s mind was inflamed with the
greatness of my ancestors, and she indefatigably sought to kindle in my
bosom a similar flame. It has been a long-established custom for the
barons and feudal vassals of the kings of France to enter with great
personal expense into the brilliant and dazzling expeditions of their
sovereigns; and my father greatly impaired his fortune in preparations
for that very campaign in which he terminated his life. My mother
industriously applied herself to the restoration of my patrimony; and
the long period of my minority afforded her scope for that purpose.

It was impossible for any boy to be treated with more kindness and
considerate indulgence than I was during the period of my adolescence.
My mother loved me to the very utmost limits perhaps of human
affection. I was her darling and her pride, her waking study, and her
nightly dream. Yet I was not pampered into corporeal imbecility, or
suffered to rust in inactivity of mind. I was provided with the best
masters. I was excited, and successfully excited, zealously to apply
myself to the lessons they taught. I became intimately acquainted with
the Italian writers of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. I was
initiated in the study of the classics, to the cultivation of which
the revival of letters at this time gave particular ardour. I was
instructed in the principles of the fine arts. There was no species of
accomplishment at that time in vogue, that my mother was not anxious I
should make my own. The only science I neglected was the very science
which has since given rise to the most extraordinary events of my life.
But the object to which my attention was principally called, was the
pursuit of military exercises, and the cultivation of every thing that
could add to the strength, agility, or grace of my body, and to the
adventurousness and enterprise of my mind. My mother loved my honour
and my fame more than she loved my person.

A circumstance that tended perhaps more than any other to fix the yet
fluctuating character of my youthful mind, was my being present as a
spectator at the celebrated meeting between Francis the First and Henry
the Eighth, king of England, in a field between Ardres and Guines. My
mother refused to accompany me, being already arrived at an age in
which curiosity and the love of festive scenes are usually diminished,
and the expenses incurred by all the nobility who attended upon this
scene being incompatible with the economy to which she rigidly adhered.
I was therefore placed under the protection of the Marquis de Villeroy,
her brother, and, with two servants who attended me, formed a part of
his suite.

I was at this time fifteen years of age. My contemplations had been
familiar with ideas of magnificence and grandeur, but my life had
been spent in the most sequestered retirement. This contrast had a
particular effect upon my disposition; it irritated to a very high
degree my passion for splendour and distinction; I lived in the fairy
fields of visionary greatness, and was more than indifferent to the
major part of the objects around me. I pined for every thing the
reverse of my present condition; I cultivated the exercises in which
I was engaged, only as they were calculated to prepare me for future
achievements.

By the incident I have mentioned, I was transported at once from a
scene of modest obscurity, to a scene of the most lavish splendour that
the world perhaps ever contemplated. I never remembered to have seen
even Paris itself. The prevailing taste of Europe has for some time led
very much to costliness in dress. This taste, in its present profusion,
I believe took its rise in the field of the Vale of Ardres. The two
kings were both in the vigour of their youth, and were said to be the
handsomest men of the age in which they lived. The beauty of Henry was
sturdy and muscular; that of Francis more refined and elegant, without
subtracting in any considerable degree from the firmness of his make.
Henry was four years older than his brother monarch. The first of them
might have been taken as a model to represent a youthful Hercules, and
the last an Apollo.

The splendour of dress that was worn upon this occasion exceeds almost
all credibility. Every person of distinction might be said in a
manner to carry an estate upon his shoulders; nor was the variety of
garments inferior to the richness. Wolsey, a man whose magnificence of
disposition was only surpassed by the pride of his soul, was for the
most part the director of the whole. He possessed the most absolute
ascendancy over the mind of his master, at the same time that Francis
artfully indulged his caprice, that he might claim from him in return a
similar indulgence in weightier matters.

The pomp of processions, and the ceremony of opening this memorable
festival, went first; a sort of solemn and half-moving pageant, which
the eye took in at leisure, and took in till it was filled. This was
succeeded by every thing that was rapid, animated, and interesting:
masques and exhibitions of all kinds; and, which was still more to me,
and which my soul devoured with indescribable ardour, joustings, tilts,
and tournaments without end. The beauty of the armour, the caparisons
of the steeds, the mettle of the animals themselves, and the ardour and
grace of the combatants, surpassed every thing that my fancy had ever
painted. These scenes were acted in the midst of a vast amphitheatre of
spectators, where all that was noble and eminent of either country was
assembled--the manliness of aspiring youth, and the boundless varieties
of female attraction. All were in their gayest attire; every eye was
lighted up with complacency and joy. If Heraclitus, or any other morose
philosopher who has expatiated on the universal misery of mankind, had
entered the field of Ardres, he must have retracted his assertions, or
fled from the scene with confusion. The kings were placed at either
end of the lists, surrounded with their courtiers. Every eye through
this vast assembly was fixed upon the combatants; the body of every one
present was inclined this way or that, in unconscious sympathy with the
redoubted knights. From time to time, as the favourites of either party
prevailed, the air was rent with shouts and acclamations.

What added to the fascination of all that I have yet mentioned, was
that now, for the first time in an equal degree perhaps for centuries,
the stiffness of unwieldy form was laid aside, and the heart of man
expanded itself with generosity and confidence. It burst the fetters
of ages; and, having burst them, it seemed to revel in its new-found
liberty. It is well known that, after a few days of idle precaution
and specious imprisonment on both sides, Francis one morning mounted
his horse, and appeared, without guards or any previous notice, before
the tent of Henry. The example was contagious, and from this time all
ceremony was laid aside. The kings themselves entered personally into
the combats of their subjects. It was a delightful and a ravishing
spectacle, to witness the freedom of the old Roman manners, almost
of the old Roman Saturnalia, polished and refined with all that was
graceful and humane in the age of chivalry.

It may easily be imagined what an effect a scene like this was
calculated to produce upon a youth of my age and my education. I
recollected with anguish that the immaturity of my years precluded me
from taking any active part in the spectacle. My appearance however was
sufficiently advantageous. I was presented to Francis the First. He
did me the honour to question me respecting my studies; and, finding
in me some knowledge of those arts and that literature, of which he
was himself so zealous a favourer, he expressed to my uncle a great
satisfaction with my figure and acquisitions. I might from this time
have been taken to court, and made one of the pages to this illustrious
monarch. But the plan of my mother was different. She did not wish for
the present that my eye should be satiated with public scenes, or that
the public should grow too familiarly acquainted with my person. She
rightly judged that my passion for the theatre of glory would grow more
impetuous, by being withheld for some time from the gratifications for
which it panted. She wished that I should present myself for the first
time among the nobility of France an accomplished cavalier, and not
suffer the disadvantage of having exposed in the eye of the world those
false steps and frailties, from which the inexperience of youth is
never entirely free. These motives being explained to the king, he was
graciously pleased to sanction them with his approbation. I accordingly
returned to finish the course of my education at my paternal château
upon the banks of the Garonne.

The state of my mind during the three succeeding years amply justified
the sagacity of my mother. I was more eager for improvement than I had
ever yet been. I had before formed some conceptions of the career of
honour from the books I had read, and from the conversation of this
excellent matron. But my reveries were impotent and little, compared
with what I had now seen. Like the author of our holy religion, I had
spent my forty days without food in the wilderness, when suddenly my
eyes were opened, and I was presented with all the kingdoms of the
world, and all the glory of them. The fairy scene continued for a
moment, and then vanished; leaving nothing behind it on all sides, but
the same barrenness and gloom by which it had been preceded. I never
shut my eyes without viewing in imagination the combats of knights
and the train of ladies. I had been regarded with distinction by my
sovereign; and Francis the First stood before my mind the abstract and
model of perfection and greatness. I congratulated myself upon being
born in an age and country so favourable to the acquisition of all that
my soul desired.

I was already eighteen years of age, when I experienced the first
misfortune that ever befel me. It was the death of my mother. She felt
the approach of her dissolution several weeks before it arrived, and
held repeated conversations with me, respecting the feelings I ought
to entertain, and the conduct it would become me to pursue, when she
should be no more.

“My son,” said she, “your character, and the promise of your early
years, have constituted my only consolation since the death of your
excellent father. Our marriage was the result of a most sincere and
exclusive attachment; and never did man more deserve to be loved than
Reginald de St. Leon. When he died, the whole world would have been
nothing to me but one vast blank, if he had not left behind him the
representative of his person, and the heir to his virtues. While I was
busied in your education, I seemed to be discharging the last duty to
the memory of my husband. The occupation was sacred to the honour of
the dead, even before it became so peculiarly pleasing to me upon its
own account, as I afterwards found it. I hope I have in some measure
discharged the task, in the manner in which my lord your father would
have wished it to have been discharged, if he had lived. I am thankful
to Heaven, that I have been spared so long for so dear and honourable a
purpose.

“You must now, my son, stand by yourself, and be the arbitrator of
your own actions. I could have wished that this necessity might have
been a little further deferred; but I trust your education has not
been of that sort which is calculated to render a young man helpless
and contemptible. You have been taught to know your rank in society,
and to respect yourself. You have been instructed in every thing that
might most effectually forward you in the career of glory. There is not
a young cavalier among all the nobility of France more accomplished,
or that promises to do greater honour to his name and his country. I
shall not live to witness the performance of this promise, but the
anticipation even now, pours a long stream of sunshine on my departing
hour.

“Farewell, my son! You no longer stand in need of my maternal care.
When I am gone, you will be compelled more vividly to feel that
singleness and self-dependence which are the source of all virtue.
Be careful of yourself. Be careful that your career may be both
spotless and illustrious. Hold your life as a thing of no account,
when it enters into competition with your fame. A true knight thinks
no sacrifice and suffering hard, that honour demands. Be humane,
gentle, generous, and intrepid. Be prompt to follow wherever your
duty calls you. Remember your ancestors, knights of the Holy Cross.
Remember your father. Follow your king, who is the mirror of valour:
and be ever ready for the service of the distressed. May Providence be
your guardian. May Heaven shower down a thousand blessings, upon your
innocence, and the gallantry of your soul!”

The death of my mother was a severe blow to my heart. For some time all
the visions of greatness and renown which had hitherto been my chosen
delight appeared distasteful to me. I hung over her insensible corpse.
When it had been committed to the earth, I repaired every day to the
spot where it was deposited, at the hour of dusk, when all visible
objects faded from the eye, when nature assumed her saddest tints,
and the whole world seemed about to be wrapped in the darkness of the
tomb. The dew of night drizzled unheeded on my head; and I did not turn
again towards the turrets of the château, till the hour of midnight had
already sounded through the stillness of the scene.

Time is the healer of almost every grief, particularly in the sprightly
season of early youth. In no long period I changed the oppression
of inactive sorrow, for the affectionate and pious recollection of
my mother’s last instructions. I had been too deeply imbued with
sentiments of glory, for it to be possible, when the first excess
of grief was over, that I should remain in indolence. The tender
remembrance of my mother itself, in no long time, furnished a new
stimulus to my ambition. I forgot the melancholy spectacle of the last
struggles of her expiring life; I even became accustomed no longer to
hear her voice, no longer to expect her presence, when I returned to
the château from a short excursion. Her last advice was now all that
survived of the author of my existence.




CHAPTER II.


I was in this state of mind, when early one morning in the beginning
of summer, soon after I rose, I was startled by the sound of trumpets
in the plain near the château. The bugle at the gate was presently
sounded; the drawbridge was let down; and the Marquis de Villeroy
entered the court-yard, accompanied by about thirty knights in complete
armour. I saluted him with respect, and the tenderness excited by
recent grief. He took me by the hand, after a short repast in the hall,
and led me to my closet.

“My son,” said he, “it is time to throw off the effeminacy of sorrow,
and to prove yourself a true soldier of the standard of France.”

“I trust, my lord,” replied I, with modest earnestness, “that you well
know, there is nothing after which my heart so ardently aspires. There
is nothing that I know worth living for but honour. Show me the path
that leads to it, or rather show me the occasion that affords scope for
the love of honour to display itself, and you shall then see whether
I am backward to embrace it. I have a passion pent up within me, that
feeds upon my vitals: it disdains speech; it burns for something more
unambiguous and substantial.”

“It is well,” rejoined my uncle. “I expected to find you thus. Your
reply to my admonition is worthy of the blood of your ancestors, and of
the maternal instructions of my sister. And, were you as dull as the
very stones you tread on, what I have to tell you might even then rouse
you into animation and ardour.”

After this short preface my uncle proceeded to relate a tale, every
word of which inflamed my spirits, and raised all my passions in arms.
I had heard something imperfectly of the state of my country; but my
mother carefully kept me in ignorance, that my ambition might not be
excited too soon, and that, when excited, it might be with the fullest
effect. While I impatiently longed for an occasion of glory, I was far
from apprehending, what I now found to be true, that the occasion which
at this period presented itself, was such, that all the licence of
fiction could scarcely have improved it.

The Marquis de Villeroy described to me the league now subsisting
against France. He revived in my memory, by terms of the most fervent
loyalty, the accomplishments and talents of my royal master. He spoke
with aversion of the phlegmatic and crafty disposition of his imperial
rival[3]; and, with the language of glowing indignation, inveighed
against the fickleness of the capricious Henry.[4] He described the
train of disasters, which had at length induced the king to take
the field in person. He contrasted, with great effect, the story of
the gallant Chevalier Bayard, _the knight without fear and without
reproach_, whose blood was still fresh in the plains of the Milanese,
with that of the Constable of Bourbon, the stain of chivalry, whom
inglorious resentment and ungoverned ambition had urged to join the
enemies of his country, in neglect of his loyalty and his oath. He
stimulated me by the example of the one, and the infamy of the other;
and assured me that there never was an opportunity more favourable for
acquiring immortal renown.

I wanted no prompter in a passion of this sort; and immediately set
about collecting the whole force of my clients and retainers. I shook
off the inglorious softness of my melancholy, and was all activity and
animation. The lessons of my youth were now called into play. I judged
it necessary to invite the assistance of some person of experience to
assist me in marshalling my men; but I did much of what was to be done
myself, and I did it well. It was my first employment in the morning:
and the last that was witnessed by the setting sun. My excellent mother
had left my revenues in the best order, and I spared no expense in the
gratification of my favourite passion.

However eager I felt myself to take the field, the desire to appear
in a manner worthy of a Count de St. Leon restrained me; and I did
not join the royal army till the Imperialists, having broken up the
siege of Marseilles, and retreated with precipitation into Italy, the
king had already crossed the Alps, entered the Milanese, and gained
uncontested possession of the capital.

From Milan Francis proceeded to Pavia. Glory was the idol of his heart;
and he was the more powerfully excited to the attack of that place,
because it was the strongest and best fortified post in the whole
duchy. The more he displayed of military prowess, the more firmly he
believed he should fix himself in his newly acquired dominions; the
inhabitants would submit to him the more willingly, and the enemy
be less encouraged to enter into a fresh contention for what he had
acquired. Such at least were the motives that he assigned for his
proceedings: in reality perhaps he was principally induced by the
brilliancy which he conceived would attend on the undertaking.

It was a few weeks after the opening of the siege, that I presented
myself to my royal master. He received me with those winning and
impressive manners by which he was so eminently distinguished. He
recollected immediately all that had passed at our interview in the
Vale of Ardres, and warmly expressed the obligations which France had
at various times owed to my ancestors. He spoke with earnest respect
of the virtues and wisdom of my mother, and commended the resolution
by which she had in former instances held me back from the public
theatre. “Young gentleman,” said the king, “I doubt not the gallantry
of your spirit; I see the impatience of a martial temper written in
your face: I expect you to act in a manner worthy of your illustrious
race, and of the instructions of a woman who deserved to be herself
a pattern to all the matrons of France. Fear not that I shall suffer
your accomplishments to rust in obscurity. I shall employ you. I shall
assign you the post of danger and of renown. Fill it nobly; and from
that hour I shall rank you in the catalogue of my chosen friends.”

The siege of Pavia proved indeed to be a transaction, in the course
of which military honour might well be acquired. It was defended by a
small, but veteran garrison, and by one of the ablest captains that
Europe at that time possessed.[5] He interrupted the approaches of
the besiegers by frequent and furious sallies. In vain, by the aid of
our excellent artillery, did we make wide and repeated breaches in
the fortifications. No sooner did we attempt to enter by the passage
we had opened, than we found ourselves encountered by a body composed
of the choicest and bravest soldiers of the garrison. The governor of
the city, who, though grey-headed and advanced in years, was profuse
of every youthful exertion, was ordinarily at the head of this body.
If we deferred our attack, or, not having succeeded in it, proposed
to commence it anew with the dawn of the following day, we were sure
to find a new wall sprung up in the room of the other, as if by
enchantment. Frequently the governor anticipated the success of our
batteries; and the old fortification was no sooner demolished, than we
beheld, to our astonishment and mortification, a new wall, which his
prudence and skill had erected at a small interval within the line of
the former.

One of these attacks took place on the second day after my arrival at
the camp of our sovereign. Every thing that I saw was new to me, and
inflamed me with ardour. The noise of the cannon, which had preceded
the attack, and which was now hushed; the inspiring sounds of martial
music which succeeded that noise; the standards floating in the air;
the firm and equal tread of the battalion that advanced; the armour of
the knights; the rugged, resolute, and intrepid countenances of the
infantry;--all swelled my soul with transport hitherto unexperienced.
I had beheld the smoke of the artillery, in the midst of which every
thing was lost and confounded; I had waited in awful suspense till
the obscurity should be dissipated; I saw with pleasure and surprise
the ruin of the wall, and the wideness of the breach. All that had
been recorded of the military feats of Christian valour seemed then to
stand crowded in my busy brain; the generosity, the condescension, the
kindness, with which the king had addressed me the day before, urged
me to treble exertion. I was in the foremost rank. We surmounted the
ditch. We were resisted by a chosen body of Spaniards. The contention
was obstinate; brave men, generous and enterprising spirits, fell on
the one side and the other. I seized the cloth of a standard, as, in
the playing of the wind, it was brought near to my hand. Between me
and the Spaniard that held it there ensued an obstinate struggle. I
watched my opportunity, and with my sword severed the flag from its
staff. At this moment the trumpets of the king sounded a retreat. I had
received two severe wounds, one in the shoulder and the other in the
thigh, in the contest. I felt myself faint with the loss of blood. A
French officer, of a rude appearance and gigantic stature, accosting
me with the appellation of boy; commanded me to surrender the standard
to him. I refused; and, to convince him I was in earnest, proceeded
to wrap it round my body, and fastened it under my arm. Soon after I
became insensible, and in this situation was accidentally found by my
uncle and his companions, who immediately took me and my prize under
their care. As soon as I was a little recovered of my wounds, the king
seized an opportunity, after having bestowed loud commendations upon my
gallantry, of conferring the honours of knighthood upon me in the face
of the whole army.

While our tents were pitched under the walls of Pavia, I was
continually extending the circle of my acquaintance among the young
gentry of France, who, like myself, had attended their sovereign
in this memorable expedition. I had some enemies, made such by the
distinctions I obtained during the siege. But they were few; the
greater part courted me the more, the more I showed myself worthy
of their attachment. Envy is not a passion that finds easy root in a
Frenchman’s bosom. I was one of the youngest of those who attended
on the siege; but my brothers in arms were generous rivals, who in
the field obstinately strove with me for superior glory, but over the
convivial board forgot their mutual competitions, and opened their
hearts to benevolence and friendship. “Let us not,” was a sentiment I
heard often repeated, “forget the object that led us from our pleasant
homes to pour from the heights of the Alps upon the fields of Italy. It
is to humble the imperious Spaniard--to punish the disloyal Bourbon--to
vindicate the honour of our beloved and illustrious monarch. Those
walls cover the enemy; yonder mountains serve to hide them from our
assault; let no Frenchman mistake him who marches under the same
standard for an adversary.”

The trenches had not been opened before Pavia till about the beginning
of November. The winter overtook us, and the siege was yet in progress;
with some apparent advantage indeed to our side of the question, but
by no means promising an instant conclusion. The season set in with
unusual severity; and both officer and soldier were glad, as much as
possible, to fence out its rigour by the indulgences of the genial
board. My finances, as I have said, were at the commencement of the
expedition in excellent order: I had brought with me a considerable
sum; and it was not spared upon the present occasion.

There were however other things to be attended to, beside the demands
of conviviality. The king became impatient of the delays of the siege.
The garrison and the inhabitants were reduced to great extremities;
but the governor discovered no symptoms of a purpose to surrender.
In the mean time intelligence was brought, that Bourbon was making
the most extraordinary exertions in Germany, and promised to lead to
the enemy a reinforcement of twelve thousand men from that country;
while the imperial generals, by mortgaging their revenues, and pawning
their jewels, and still more by their eloquence and influence with
those under their command, were able to keep together the remains of a
disheartened and defeated army in expectation of his arrival. There
was some danger therefore, if the siege were not speedily terminated,
that the king might ultimately be obliged to raise it with ignominy, or
to fight the enemy under every disadvantage. Francis however was not to
be deterred from his undertaking. He swore a solemn oath, that Pavia
should be his, or he would perish in the attempt.

Thus circumstanced, he conceived a very extraordinary project. Pavia is
defended on one side by the Tesino, the scene of the first of the four
famous battles by which Hannibal signalised his invasion of Italy. The
king believed that if this river could by the labour of his army be
diverted from its course, the town must instantly fall into his hands.
He was encouraged to the undertaking, by recollecting a stratagem of
a similar nature by which Cyrus formerly made himself master of the
city of Babylon. It was a thought highly flattering to the grandeur of
his soul, to imagine that posterity would in this instance institute a
parallel between him and Cyrus the Great.

The plan for diverting the course of the Tesino produced a new and
extraordinary scene. It was, as may well be believed, a work of
uncommon labour. A new channel was to be scooped out and deepened; and,
while the stream was turned into this channel, piles were to be sunk,
and an immense mound of earth created, as an effectual impediment to
the waters resuming their former course. This was a heavy burthen to
the soldier, in addition to the disadvantage of being encamped during
the course of a winter remarkably severe for the climate in which we
fought. By any other army the task would have been performed with
cloudiness and discontent, if not complained of with repining and
murmurs. But here the gaiety of the French character displayed itself.
The nobility of France, who attended their sovereign in great numbers,
accompanied the infantry in their labour. We laid aside the indulgence
of the marquée, of tapestry and carpets; we threw off our upper
garments; and each seized a spade, a barrow of earth, or a mattock.
We put our hands to the engines, and refused no effort under pretence
that it was sordid or severe. While the trees were leafless, and nature
appeared bound up in frost, sweat ran down our faces and bedewed our
limbs. The army were encouraged by our example. An employment which,
under other circumstances, would have been regarded as rigid, was thus
made a source of new hilarity and amusement. It was a memorable sight
to behold the venerable and grey-headed leaders of the French army
endeavouring to exert the strength and activity of their early years.
To me, who had but lately arrived at the stature of manhood, and who
was accustomed to all the exercises which give strength and vigour to
the frame, this new employment was in no degree burdensome. I felt
in it the satisfaction that a swift man experiences when he enters
the lists of the race; I congratulated myself upon the nature of my
education; if it be a sin to covet honour, that guilt was mine; and,
so great was my appetite for it, that I was inexpressibly rejoiced to
observe the various ways in which it might be gratified.

Strange as it may seem, this scene of a winter-camp, in the midst
of blood and sweat, surrounded with dangers, and called on for
unparalleled exertions, appears to me, through the vista of years
that is now interposed between, to have been one of the happiest of
my life. The gay labours and surprises of the day were succeeded by
a convivial evening, in which we did not the less open our hearts,
though frequently liable to be interrupted in our midnight revels by
the inexhaustible activity and stratagems of the enemy. In this various
and ever-shifting scene, I forgot the disasters that occurred, and
the blood that flowed around me. All sense of a large and impartial
morality was, for the time at least, deadened in my breast. I was ever
upon the alert. The diversity of events neither suffered my spirits
to flag, nor reflection to awake. It is only upon such occasions, or
occasions like these, that a man is able fully to feel what life is,
and to revel in its exuberance. Above all, I was delighted with the
society and friendship of my brother-officers. They honoured me; they
loved me. I seemed to feel what sympathy was; and to have conscious
pleasure in making one in a race of beings like myself. Such were my
sensations.

It must not, however, be imagined, that all about me felt in these
respects as I did. I was deeply indebted in this particular to my youth
and my fortune. The old endeavoured to brace themselves in vain; they
sunk under the continual pressure. The poor soldier from the ranks
laboured incessantly, and I laboured as much as he; but he had little
opportunity to recruit his vigour and renovate his strength. There
was yet another class of persons in the camp, whose gaiety was much
less interrupted than mine. These were, the king, and the generals who
commanded under him. They could not be entirely devoid of thought and
consideration. They suffered much anxiety from the length of the siege;
and felt that every period of delay increased the doubtfulness of the
event.

Antonio de Leyva, governor of the city, necessarily felt himself
alarmed at the extraordinary project in which we were engaged, and
made every exertion to prevent it. One evening the king sent for me to
his tent, and told me in confidence that the enemy intended that very
night to make three several attacks upon our mound, one on each side of
the stream, and one by means of boats in the centre. Two of these, he
said, were merely intended as feints; the west bank of the Tesino was
the point against which their principal exertions would be directed.
On that side he was resolved to command in person; the boats with
which he proposed to resist their flota he confided to one of the most
famous and valuable officers of his army; the detachment on the east
bank he purposed to intrust to my uncle and myself. He observed, that
the detachment he could spare for that purpose, after having formed
the other two bodies, and reserved a sufficient number for the defence
of the camp and the works, would be small; and he warned me to the
exertion of a particular vigilance. It would be doubly unfortunate, if
a body, the attack upon which was to be merely a feigned one, should
nevertheless be routed. “Go,” added he, “fulfil my expectations;
deport yourself answerably to the merit of your first achievement; and
depend upon it that you will prove hereafter one of the most eminent
supporters of the martial glory of France.”

The Marquis de Villeroy divided our little force into two bodies: with
the larger he lay in wait for the enemy near the scene of the expected
attack: the smaller he confided to my direction, and placed so that
we might be able to fall upon the rear of the garrison-troops as soon
as they should be fully engaged with our comrades. In the situation
assigned me I took advantage of the skirts of a wood, which enabled
me to approach very near to the expected route of our assailants,
without being perceived by them. The night was extremely dark, yet
the vicinity of my position was such, that I could count the numbers
of the adversary as they passed along before my hiding-place. I was
alarmed to find that they amounted to at least the triple of what we
had been taught to expect. They were no sooner past, than I despatched
to the king a young knight, my particular friend, who happened to be
with me, to urge the necessity of a reinforcement. At the same time I
sent a messenger to my uncle, by a circuitous route, to inform him of
what I had observed, and the step I had taken, and to entreat him to
defer the attack as long as consistently with propriety it should be
possible. The enemy, however, had no sooner arrived at the place of
his destination, than the troops of the marquis, no longer capable of
restraint, rushed to engage. The Spaniards were at first surprised,
but a short time led them to suspect the weakness of their assailants;
nor was the assistance I brought to my uncle sufficient to turn the
fortune of the fight. We lost many of our men; the rest apparently gave
ground; and it was a vain attempt, amidst the darkness of the night,
to endeavour to restore order and rally them to the assault. We were
already almost completely overpowered, when the succours we expected
reached us. They were, however, unable to distinguish friend from
enemy. A storm of mingled rain and snow had come on, which benumbed our
limbs, drove fiercely in our faces, and rendered every object alike
viewless. The carnage which in this situation took place was terrible.
Our blows were struck at random. A Frenchman was not less dreadful than
a Spaniard. When the battle ceased, scarcely one of the enemy was left
alive; but we observed with astonishment and horror the number of the
besiegers who had probably, in the midst of the confusion, been cut to
pieces by their own countrymen.

I am now arrived at the period which put an end to the festivity and
jocundness of the campaign. All after this was one continued series
of disaster. About the close of January, our work, though not wholly
interrupted, was considerably retarded by a succession of heavy rains.
This was injurious to us in many ways; our project, which was executed
in the midst of waters, rendered additional damp a matter of serious
consideration. We were also seized with an apprehension of still
greater magnitude, which was speedily realised. The snows being at
length completely dissolved, and the quantity of water continually
increasing, we perceived one afternoon strong symptoms that our
mound, the principal subject of our labour and source of our hope,
was giving way in various places. The next morning at daybreak, it
rushed down every where at once with wonderful violence and noise. It
is difficult to describe the sensation of anguish which was instantly
and universally diffused. The labour of many weeks was overthrown in
a moment. As we had proceeded in our work, we every day saw ourselves
nearer the object to which we aspired. At this time our project was
almost completed, and Pavia was in imagination already in our hands,
to gain possession of which had cost us such unremitted exertions, the
display of so much gallantry, and the loss of so many soldiers. We were
confounded at the catastrophe we saw. We gazed at each other, each in
want of encouragement, and every one unable to afford it.

Still, however, we were not destitute of advantages. The garrison began
to be in want both of ammunition and provisions. They were in a general
state of discontent, almost of mutiny, which scarcely all the address
and authority of the governor were able to suppress. If the town
continued longer unrelieved, it was sure to fall into our hands. But
even this our last hope was considerably diminished by the intelligence
we received the very day after the destruction of our mound, that
the imperial army, after having received large reinforcements, was
approaching in considerable force. The king had some time before, in
the height of his confidence, and elation of his heart, sent off a
detachment of six thousand men to invade the kingdom of Naples; for
upon that, as well as the Milanese, he had inherited pretensions from
his immediate predecessors.

But, though the enemy was superior in numbers, and a part perhaps of
their forces better disciplined than ours, they laboured under several
disadvantages to which we were not exposed. The Emperor, though his
dominions were more extensive, did not derive from them a revenue
equal to that of Francis. As he did not take the field in person, the
war appeared to his subjects only a common war, proceeding upon the
ordinary motives of war. But my countrymen were led by their sovereign,
were fresh from the recent insolence of an invasion of their own
territory, and fought at once for personal glory and their country’s
honour. The king, who commanded them, seemed expressly formed to obtain
their attachment and affection. His nobles became enthusiastic by the
example of his enthusiasm, and willingly disbursed their revenues to
give prosperity and éclat to the campaign.

The first question that arose upon the approach of the enemy was,
whether we should break up the siege, and attend in some strong post
the slow, but sure, effect of their want of money, and the consequent
dispersion of their troops, or wait their attack in our present
posture. The former advice was safe; but to the gallant spirit of
Francis it appeared ignominious. He was upon all occasions the partisan
of rapid measures and decisive proceedings; and his temper, with the
exception of a few wary and deliberate counsellors, accorded with
that of our whole army. For some days we congratulated ourselves upon
the wisdom of our choice; we presented to the enemy so formidable an
appearance, that, notwithstanding the cogent motives he had to proceed,
he hesitated long before he ventured to attack us. At length, however,
the day came that was pregnant with so momentous expectation.

If through the whole limits of our camp there was not a man that did
not feel himself roused upon this glorious occasion, to me it was
especially interesting. The scene accorded with the whole purpose of
my education, and novelty made it impressive. I lived only in the
present moment. I had not a thought, a wish, a straggling imagination,
that wandered beyond the circuit of the day. My soul was filled; at one
minute wild with expectation, and at another awed into solemnity. There
is something indescribably delicious in this concentration of the mind.
It raises a man above himself; and makes him feel a certain nobleness
and elevation of character, of the possession of which he was to that
hour unconscious. Fear and pain were ideas that could find no harbour
in my bosom: I regarded this as the most memorable of days, and myself
as the most fortunate of mortals. Far indeed was I from anticipating
the disgraceful event, in which this elation of heart speedily
terminated.

The sun rose bright in a cloudless sky. The cold of the season was
such, as only to give new lightness and elasticity to the muscles and
animal spirits. I saw few of those objects of nature, which in this
delightful climate gave so sacred a pleasure to the human soul. But
in my present temper there was no object of sight so ravishing, as
the firm and equal steps of the martial bands, the impatience of the
war-horse, and the display of military standards; nor any music so
enchanting, as the shrillness of the pipe, the clangor of the trumpet,
the neighing of steeds, and the roaring of cannon. It is thus that man
disguises to himself the real nature of his occupation; and clothes
that which is of all things the most nefarious or most to be lamented,
with the semblance of jubilee and festival.

The Imperialists were at first unable to withstand the efforts of
French valour. They gave way on every side; we pursued our advantage
with impetuosity. To the slaughter of whole ranks mowed down with
tremendous celerity, to the agonies of the dying, I was blind; their
groans had no effect on my organ, for my soul was occupied in another
direction. My horse’s heels spurned their mangled limbs, and were red
with their blood. I fought not merely with valour, but with fury; I
animated those around me by my example and my acclamations. It may seem
contrary to delicacy to speak with this freedom of my own praises;
but I am at my present writing totally changed and removed from what
I was, and I write with the freedom of a general historian. It is
this simplicity and ingenuousness that shall pervade the whole of my
narrative.

The fortune of the day speedily changed. The cowardice and desertion
of our Swiss allies gave the first signal of adversity. The gallant
commander of the garrison of Pavia sallied out in the midst of the
fight, and suddenly attacked us in the rear. A stratagem of the
Imperial general effected the rout of our cavalry. The whole face of
the field was utterly reversed.

It would be in vain for me to attempt to describe even the small part
that I beheld of the calamity and slaughter of the French army. At
this distance of time, the recollection of it opens afresh the almost
obliterated wounds of my heart. I saw my friends cut down, and perish
on every side. Those who, together with myself, had marched out in the
morning, swelled with exultation and hope, now lay weltering in their
blood. Their desires, their thoughts, their existence, were brought to
a fatal termination. The common soldiers were hewed and cut to pieces
by hundreds, without note and observation. Many of the first nobility
of France, made desperate by the change of the battle, rushed into the
thickest of the foe, and became so many voluntary sacrifices; choosing
rather to perish, than to turn their backs with dishonour.

In the battle I had two horses killed under me. The first of them
suffered a sort of gradual destruction. He had already received one
wound in the nostrils, and another in the neck, when a third shot
carried away two of his feet, and laid him prostrate on the earth.
Bernardin, my faithful attendant, observed what was passing, and
immediately brought me a fresh charger; but I had not long mounted him,
when he received a wound which killed him on the spot. I was myself
hurt in several places, and at length the stroke of a sabre brought
me to the ground. Here I remained for a long time insensible. When I
recovered, and looked around me, I found myself in entire solitude,
and could at present perceive no trace either of the enemy or of my
own people. Soon, however, I recollected what had passed, and was but
too well assured of the defeat my countrymen had sustained. Weak
and battered as I was, I attempted to retire to a place of greater
security. I had scarcely changed my ground, before I saw a trooper
of the enemy rushing towards me, with the intention to take away my
life. Fortunately I observed a tree at hand, to the shelter of which I
hastened; and, partly by moving the branches to and fro, and partly by
shifting my position, I baffled my adversary, till he became weary of
the attempt. A moment after, I saw one of my most intimate and familiar
companions killed before my eyes. It was not long, however, before a
party of fugitive French came up to the spot where I stood, and I, like
the rest, was hurried from the field. My uncle perished in the battle.

It is wonderful how men can harden their hearts against such scenes as
I then witnessed. It is wonderful how they can be brought to co-operate
in such demoniac fury, and more than demoniac mischief, barbarity, and
murder. But they are brought to it; and enter, not from a deplorable
necessity, but as to a festival, in which each man is eager to occupy
his place, and share the amusements. It seemed to me at that time, as
it seems to me now, that it should be enough for a man to contemplate
such a field as I saw at Pavia, to induce him to abjure the trade of
violence for ever, and to commit his sword once more to the bowels of
the earth, from which it was torn for so nefarious a purpose.

These sensations, though now finally established in my mind, were, at
the time of which I am writing, but of fleeting duration. The force of
education, and the first bent of my mind, were too strong. The horror
which overwhelmed me in the first moments of this great national defeat
subsided; and the military passion returned upon me in its original
ardour. My convictions, and the moral integrity of my soul, were
temporary; and I became myself a monument of that inconstancy and that
wonder, to which I have just alluded.

Various circumstances, however, prevented this passion from its direct
operation. The character of France was altered by the battle of Pavia,
though mine remained the same. It was in the fullest degree decisive
of the fortune of the war. Milan, and every other place in the
duchy, opened their gates to the conqueror; and, in a fortnight, not
a Frenchman was left in the fields of Italy. Of the whole army only a
small body effected an orderly retreat, under the command of the Duke
of Alençon. Many persons of the highest distinction perished in the
battle: many were made prisoners by the enemy. France by this event
found the list of her noblesse considerably reduced in numbers; add to
which, those whose loss she sustained, were almost all of them taken
from among the most distinguished and meritorious in the catalogue.

But what constituted the principal feature in this memorable event
was, that the king himself was found in the number of the prisoners;
nor was he released by his ungenerous competitor till after more
than a twelvemonth’s confinement. During this period Francis tasted
of the dregs of adversity. Inclined in the first instance to judge
of his rival by himself, he expected a liberal treatment. In this
he was deeply disappointed. After a detention of many months in the
Milanese, the scene of his former successes, he was transferred to
Madrid. He was personally neglected by the emperor, while his disloyal
subject[6] was treated with singular distinction. The most rigorous
terms were proposed to him. All this had the effect, in one instance,
of sinking him into a disease of languor and dejection which he was not
expected to survive; and, in another, of inducing him to execute an
instrument by which he abdicated the crown, and declared his resolution
of remaining a prisoner for life. His confinement was at length
terminated by his solemnly engaging to compulsory articles, which he
was determined to break as soon as he found himself at liberty; an
alternative peculiarly grating to the liberality of his spirit. This
reverse of fortune materially changed his character. The fine spirit
of his ambition was from this time evaporated; and, while he still
retained the indefeasible qualities of his soul, and was gallant,
kind-hearted, and generous, he bartered, as far as was compatible
with his disposition, the enterprising and audacious temper he had
previously manifested, for the wary and phlegmatic system of his
more fortunate competitor. His genius cowered before that of Charles;
and the defeat of Pavia may, perhaps, be considered as having given a
deadly wound to the reign of chivalry, and a secure foundation to that
of craft, dissimulation, corruption, and commerce.




CHAPTER III.


The lists of military ambition then being closed, if not permanently,
at least for a time, my mind took a new bias; and, without dismissing
its most cherished and darling passion, pursued a path in the present
emergency, to which the accidents of my youth had also guided me. If my
mother had survived, she would probably either not have consented to
my serving at the siege of Pavia, or at least would have recalled me
to the obscurity of my paternal château as soon as the campaign was at
an end. I had not fully completed the twentieth year of my age, at the
period of the memorable battle in which my sovereign was made prisoner.
I was left without adviser or guide; even the Marquis de Villeroy, my
mother’s brother, of whatever consequence his admonitions to me might
have proved, was taken from me in this fatal engagement. The king
himself, perhaps, had it not been for the dreadful calamities in which
he was now involved, might have condescended to interest himself in
some degree in my welfare. By the course of events, I was left, yet a
minor, and with an ample revenue at my disposition, to be wholly guided
by the suggestions of my own mind.

In the portion of his reign already elapsed, the splendid and
interesting qualities of Francis had given a new spring to the
sentiments of the nation. He was the most accomplished and amiable
prince of the time in which he lived. There was but one of all the
sovereigns of Christendom that could cope with him in power,--the
Emperor Charles; and as Charles’s peculiarities were of a sort that
Frenchmen were accustomed to regard with aversion and contempt, so
there had not been a doubt among my compatriots, of the side upon which
the superiority would ultimately rest. By the events of the day of
Pavia they were confounded and overwhelmed. They did not despair of
their country; they soon felt, and felt to its utmost extent, the rank
which France held among the European states. But the chain of their
ideas was interrupted; they could not but be conscious that the fortune
of the kingdom had received a grievous check. The illustrious career
which they had in fancy already traversed, was postponed to a distant
period.

The consequences which flow from a suppressed ambition may easily be
imagined. The nobility of France exchanged the activity of the field
for the indulgences of the table: that concentrated spirit which had
sought to expand itself upon the widest stage, now found vent in the
exhibition of individual expense: and, above all, the sordid and
inglorious passion for gaming, a vice eminently characteristic of the
age, now especially gained strength, and drew multitudes into its
destructive vortex. It was, perhaps, impossible for a young man to have
entered the theatre of the world under less favourable auspices.

In what I have already written, I felt myself prompted to enlarge with
complacency upon the sentiments and scenes of my youth; and I have
yielded to the suggestion. The same internal admonition makes me shrink
from entering with minuteness into the detail of my ruin. I recollect
my infatuation with abhorrence; I fly from the memory with sensations
inexpressibly painful; I regard it as a cloud that overshadowed and
blackened for ever the fair prospects of my earlier years.

I shall not enumerate all my youthful companions, or all my youthful
follies. I committed a mistake obvious enough, at this immature
period of my existence, when I mistook profusion and extravagance
for splendour and dignity; and the prudent economy which my mother
had practised, served, in the present instance, as the pander to my
vices. The whole tendency of my education had been to inspire me with
a proud and restless desire of distinction; and I was not content to
play a second part in the career of my vices, as I should not have been
content to play a second part in the genuine theatre of honour and
fame. In all that was thoughtlessly spirited and gaily profligate, I
led the way to my compeers, and was constantly held up by them as an
example. By this conduct I incurred the censure of the rigorous and the
old; but the voice of censure reached me much seldomer than that of
adulation. My person and demeanour were the topics of general applause.
I was tall and well-proportioned; my frame was slender and agile, but
with an appearance of the fullest health; my countenance was open,
commanding, and animated: my rank and situation in the world gave me
confidence; the fire and impetuosity of my temper rendered my gestures
easy, rapid, expressive, and graceful. The consequence of all this was,
to confirm me in a plan of life which I early laid down to myself, and
from which I never in any instance deviated. I put aside those rules,
as splenetic and hypercritical, which confessors preach, and with which
the preceptors of young men are accustomed to weary and alienate the
minds of their pupils. The charge of being disorderly and unthinking
I despised; that of imprudence, even when meant for blame, sounded in
my ear like the voice of encomium. But, accustomed from education to
sentiments of honour, and from habit to the language of eulogy, it is
difficult for any man to be more firmly bent than I was to incur no
breath of dishonour, or to draw the line more peremptorily between the
follies of youth and the aberrations of a gross and unprincipled spirit.

It may be alleged, indeed, and with considerable justice, that the
habit of gaming is an exception to this statement. It was with
hesitation and reluctance that I entered into this habit. I saw it as
it was, and as every ingenuous and undebauched mind must see it, base
and sordid. The possession of some degree of wealth I regarded, indeed,
as indispensable to a man who would fill a lofty and respectable
character in the world; a character that, by uniting the advantages
of exterior appearance with the actions of a hero, should extort the
homage of his species. But, in the picture I drew of this man in my
mind, I considered wealth as an accident, the attendant on his birth,
to be dispensed with dignity, not to be adverted to with minuteness
of attention. Deep play is certainly sufficiently inconsistent with
this character. The direct purpose of the gamester is to transfer
money from the pocket of his neighbour into his own. He rouses his
sleepy and wearied attention by the most sordid of all motives. The
fear of losing pierces his heart with anguish; and to gain--to obtain
an advantage for himself which can scarcely exceed, and which seldom
equals, the injury his competitor suffers,--is the circumstance which
most transports his heart with delight. For this he watches; for this
he calculates. An honourable gamester does not seize with premeditation
the moment when his adversary is deprived, by wine or any other cause,
of his usual self-possession. He does not seek with sober malice to
play upon his passions. He does not enter with avidity into the contest
with an unpractised but presuming rival: but he cannot avoid rejoicing,
when he finds that accident has given him an unusual advantage. I have
often thought that I could better understand how a man of honour could
reconcile himself to the accursed and murderous trade of war, than to
the system of the gaming table. In war, he fights with a stranger,
a man with whom he has no habits of kindness, and who is fairly
apprised that he comes against him with ruinous intent. But in play,
he robs, perhaps, his brother, his friend, the partner of his bosom;
or, in every event, a man seduced into the snare with all the arts of
courtesy, and whom he smiles upon, even while he stabs.

I am talking here the mere reason and common sense of the question
as it relates to mankind in general. But it is with other feelings
that I reflect upon the concern I have myself individually in the
subject. Years roll on in vain; ages themselves are useless here;
looking forward, as I do, to an existence that shall endure till time
shall be no more; no time can wipe away the remembrance of the bitter
anguish that I have endured, the consequence of gaming. It is torture!
It is madness! Poverty, I have drained thy cup to the dregs! I have
seen my wife and my children looking to me in vain for bread! Which
is the most intolerable distress?--that of the period, in which all
the comforts of life gradually left me; in which I caught at every
fragment of promise, and every fragment failed; in which I rose every
morning to pamper myself with empty delusions; in which I ate the
apples of purgatory, fair without, but within bitterness and ashes; in
which I tossed, through endless, sightless nights, upon the couch of
disappointment and despair?--or the period, when at length all my hopes
were at an end; when I fled with horror to a foreign climate; when my
family, that should have been my comfort, gave me my most poignant
agony; when I looked upon them, naked, destitute, and exiles, with the
tremendous thought, what and who it was that had caused their ruin?
Adversity, without consolation,--adversity, when its sting is remorse,
self-abhorrence and self-contempt,--hell has no misery by which it can
be thrown into shade or exceeded!

Why do I dwell upon, or at least why do I anticipate, this detested
circumstance of my story? Let me add one remark in this place, and
pass on to the other particulars of this epoch of my prodigality. It
is true, I must take this shameful appellation to myself--I was a
gamester. But, in the beginning, I took no concern in that species of
science which is often implied in the appellation. My games were games
of hazard, not of skill. It appeared to my distempered apprehension
to be only a mode in which for a man to display his fortitude and
philosophy; I was flattered with the practice of gaming, because I saw
in it, when gracefully pursued, the magnanimity of the stoic, combined
with the manners of a man of the world; a magnanimity that no success
is able to intoxicate, and no vicissitude to subvert. I committed my
property to the hazard of the die; and I placed my ambition in laughing
alike at the favours of fortune and her frowns. In the sequel, however,
I found myself deceived. The fickle goddess sufficiently proved that
she had the power of making me serious. But in her most tremendous
reverses, I was never influenced to do any thing that the most
scrupulous gamester regards as dishonourable. I say not this for the
purpose of giving colour and speciousness to my tale. I say it, because
I have laid it down to myself in this narrative as a sacred principle,
to relate the simple, unaltered truth.

Another characteristic of the reign of Francis the First, is its
gallantries. It is well known how much the king was himself occupied
with attachments of this sort; his government was rather the government
of women than of politicians; and the manners of the sovereign strongly
tended to fix the habits of his subjects. A very young man rather
takes the tone of his passions from those about him, than forms one
that is properly his own; and this was my case in the present instance
as well as in the preceding. Originally of an amorous constitution, I
should perhaps have quieted the restlessness of my appetites without
ostentation and éclat, had not the conduct of my youthful associates in
general led me to regard gallantry as an accomplishment indispensably
necessary in a young man of rank. It must be confessed, indeed, that
this offence against the rigour of discipline has a thousand advantages
over that of gaming. Few women of regular and reputable lives have that
ease of manners, that flow of fancy, and that graceful intrepidity
of thinking and expressing themselves, that is sometimes to be found
among those who have discharged themselves from the tyranny of custom.
There is something irresistibly captivating in that voluptuousness
which, while it assumes a certain air of freedom, uniformly and
with preference conforms itself to the dictates of unsophisticated
delicacy. A judicious and limited voluptuousness is necessary to the
cultivation of the mind, to the polishing of the manners, to the
refining of sentiment and the developement of the understanding; and
a woman deficient in this respect may be of use for the government
of our families, but can neither add to the enjoyments, nor fix the
partiality, of a man of animation and taste.

But whatever there may be in these considerations, certain it is that
the conduct I pursued in matters of gallantry led me into great and
serious expenses. The mistresses with whom I chanced to associate had
neither the inexpressible captivation of madame de Chateaubriant,
nor the aspiring and impressive manners of the duchess d’Etampes[7].
They had, however, beauty and vivacity, frolic without rudeness,
and softness without timidity. They had paid some regard to points
of knowledge and taste, considering these as additional means for
fixing the partiality of their paramours, and knowing that they had
no security for the permanence of their prosperity but in the variety
of their attractions. In their society I was led into new trains of
reflection, a nicer consideration of human passion and the varieties of
human character, and, above all, into a greater quickness and delicacy
in matters of intellectual taste. My hours, for the most part, rolled
swiftly and easily away, sometimes in the society of the young, the gay
and the ambitious of my own sex, and sometimes in the softer and more
delicious intercourse of the fair. I lived in the midst of all that
Paris could at that time furnish of splendid and luxurious. This system
of living was calculated to lull me in pleasing dreams, and to waste
away existence in delirious softness. It sufficiently accorded with
the sad period of our sovereign’s captivity, when my young compatriots
sought to drown the sense of public and patriotic considerations in
copious draughts of pleasure; nor did the monarch’s return immediately
restore to France her former haughtiness and pride.

The course of sensuality in which I was now engaged, though it did not
absolutely sink into grossness, may well be supposed to have trodden
upon the very edge of licence. I and my companions were young; we
were made fearless and presuming by fortune and by rank; we had laid
aside those more rigorous restraints which render the soberer part of
mankind plausible and decent, by making them timid and trite. I will
not contaminate the minds of my innocent and inexperienced readers by
entering into the detail of the follies in which I engaged.

One thing it is necessary to remark, as essential to the main
thread of my story. My expenses of all kinds, during this period of
self-desertion, drained my resources, but did not tarnish my good
name. My excesses were regarded by some as ornamental and becoming,
but by all were admitted as venial. The laurels I had won in the field
of military honour were not obscured by my subsequent conduct. I was
universally ranked among the most promising and honourable of the
young noblemen of France. I had some rivals; I did not pass through
this turbulent and diversified scene without disputes; but no one
cast a reflection upon my name, no one ventured to speak of me with
superciliousness and opprobrium. Nor was my temper more injured than
my reputation. From every dispute I extricated myself with grace
and propriety; I studied the pleasure and ease of all with whom I
associated; and no man enjoyed more extensively than I did the sweets
of friendship, as far as the sweets of friendship can be extensively
enjoyed.




CHAPTER IV.


I had been now two years in habits of life and a mode of expense
extremely injurious to my patrimony, when a circumstance occurred,
which promised completely to deliver me from the ruinous consequences
of my own folly. This was no other than my encounter with that
incomparable woman, who afterwards became the partner of my life, and
the mother of my children. I cannot even now recollect her without
tears: the sentiment which her very name excites in my mind is a
mingled feeling, on the one hand, of the most exquisite and unspeakable
delight, a feeling that elevates and expands and electrifies my
throbbing heart; and, on the other, of the bitterest anguish and
regret. I must develope the source of this feeling.

Marguerite Louise Isabeau de Damville was, at the period of our first
meeting, in the nineteenth year of her age. Her complexion was of
the most perfect transparency, her eyes black and sparkling, and her
eyebrows dark and long. Such were the perfect smoothness and clearness
of her skin, that at nineteen she appeared five years younger than
she was, and she long retained this extreme juvenility of form. Her
step was airy and light as that of a young fawn, yet at the same
time firm, and indicative of strength of body and vigour of mind.
Her voice, like the whole of her external appearance, was expressive
of undesigning, I had almost said childish, simplicity. Yet, with
all this playfulness of appearance, her understanding was bold and
correct. Her mind was well furnished with every thing that could add
to her accomplishments as a wife or a mother. Her indulgent parents
had procured her every advantage of education, and circumstances had
been uncommonly favourable to her improvement. She was encouraged
and assisted in the art of drawing, for which she discovered a very
early talent, by Leonardo da Vinci; and she formed her poetical taste
from the conversation and instructions of Clement Marot. But, amidst
the singular assemblage of her intellectual accomplishments, there
was nothing by which she was so much distinguished, as the uncommon
prudence of her judgments, and the unalterable amiableness of her
manners. This was the woman destined to crown my happiness, and
consummate my misery. If I had never known her, I should never have
tasted true pleasure; if I had been guided by her counsels, I should
not have drained to the very dregs the cup of anguish.

The house of her father, the Marquis de Damville, was the resort of
all the most eminent wits and scholars of that period, particularly of
Marot, Rabelais, Erasmus and Scaliger. This was my first inducement to
frequent it. My education had inspired me with an inextinguishable love
of literature; and the dissipation in which I was at this time involved
could not entirely interrupt the propensity. The most thoughtless and
extravagant period of my life had occasional intervals of study and
reflection; and the gay, animated, and ingenious conversation of the
men I have mentioned, had always peculiar charms for me.

I had continued for some time to visit at the Marquis’s hotel, before
I encountered the beautiful Marguerite. The first time I saw her, she
made a deep impression upon me. The Marquis, who was one of the most
benevolent and enlightened of mankind, had been led by my character and
manners to conceive a warm friendship for me. He saw the ruin in which
I was heedlessly involving myself, and believed that it was not yet
too late to save me. As he thought that there was no method so likely
to effect my reformation as the interposition of domestic affections,
he was not unwilling to encourage the attachment I began to feel for
his daughter. On my part I wanted but little encouragement. I no sooner
observed her manners, and became acquainted with her merits, than my
heart was unalterably fixed. I became as it were a new man. I was like
one, who, after his eyes had grown imperceptibly dim till at length
every object appeared indistinct and of a gloomy general hue, has his
sight instantaneously restored, and beholds the fabric of the universe
in its genuine clearness, brilliancy, and truth. I was astonished at my
own folly, that I could so long have found gratification in pleasures
mean and sensual. I was ashamed of my own degradation. I could not
endure the comparison between the showy, unsubstantial attractions of
the women I had hitherto frequented, and the charms of the adorable
Marguerite. The purity of her mind seemed to give a celestial
brilliancy and softness to the beauties of her person. The gross and
brutal pursuits of the debauchee are often indeed described by the same
epithets as the virtuous and refined passion with which I was now for
the first time inspired; but experience convinced me that they differed
in their most essential features.

The Marquis saw the state of my mind, and addressed me thus. “Count,”
said he, “I feel the most ardent friendship for you. I am inexpressibly
concerned for your welfare. You will be convinced of this, when I have
furnished you with a clue to my late conduct towards you. I regard you,
if not as a ruined man, at least as a man in the high road to ruin.
Your present habits are of the most dangerous sort; they appear to
you perfectly conformable to principles of the strictest honour; nay,
they come recommended to you by a certain éclat and dignity with which
they seem to be surrounded. I could say to you, Recollect yourself.
Be not misled by delusive appearances. Consider the present state of
your fortune, and the state in which your mother left it. You cannot be
ignorant how greatly it is impaired. How has this circumstance arisen?
Have your revenues been expended in the service of your country?
Have you purchased any thing by them that will confer on you lasting
renown? Put together the sum of actions, which, piece by piece, you
have been willing to regard as indifferent and innocent, if not as
graceful and becoming. You cannot but be struck with their monstrous
deformity. Is it possible that you can be ignorant of the nature of
poverty? There is such a thing as honourable poverty. The poverty of
Cincinnatus was honourable, who impoverished himself by paying the fine
which was factiously imposed on his son, and then was contented to
pass his time alternately between the highest situations and the most
rigid simplicity. The poverty of a man of genius, such as Rabelais,
if not honourable, is interesting, when we compare his merits and
worth with that of many of those persons upon whom fortune has blindly
lavished her favours. It is honourable, if he have declined the means
of enriching himself by the sacrifice of his independence and his
principles. But of all earthly things the most contemptible is the
man who, having wasted his goods in riotous living, yet hungers after
the luxuries that have proved his bane, and feasts himself upon the
steam of dainties of which he has lost the substance. Poverty, always
sufficiently disadvantageous in a degenerate age, where attention and
courtship are doled forth with scales of gold, is tremendous to him.
He is the scorn of all mankind. Wherever he is a guest, he is invited
only to be trampled upon and insulted. He is capable of nothing, and is
a burden to society and mankind. The helplessness of age advances upon
him with stealing steps, and he is destined to gather all its miseries
and none of its consolations.

“I might have talked to you thus, but I refused it. I apprehend
something of the nature of advice. I know that it can seldom be
attended with its genuine effect, and will never be received
with deference and pleasure, where its motives are capable of
misconstruction. If I had talked to you thus, I might have appeared
to be indulging the tyranny of age; I might have seemed to assume an
unbecoming air of superiority and command: it could not have been clear
that I was honestly interested in that, about which I affected so much
concern. I doubt not the ingenuousness of your nature. I doubt not that
you would have been struck with the picture. But I must be permitted to
doubt the adequate and lasting effect of my expostulation. I was not
willing by my forwardness and loquacity to wear out one of the great
springs of human improvement.

“I have determined on your reform. For that purpose I think it
necessary to combine my remonstrances and advice, with a change of your
habits and situation. You have tasted largely of what are commonly
called the pleasures of life, but there are pleasures that you have not
tasted. At this moment you anticipate them; and anticipate them with
the ardour of a lover. But you know not yet all the gratifications that
attend upon domestic affections.

“I am willing to bestow upon you my daughter. I consent to prove the
purity of my advice, and the sincerity of my regard, by committing her
happiness to the risk. She is a treasure, the equal of which perhaps
the world does not hold. I speak not of her personal attractions.
But in understanding, accomplishments, and virtue, I firmly believe
no woman living can compare with her. In possessing her, you will
be blessed beyond the lot of princes. But, at the same time that I
shall thus put happiness within your grasp, remember that I commit
to your disposal the happiness of Marguerite. You are a worthy and
an honourable man; your talents and your virtues will constitute her
felicity. Her portion will redeem the injury which your patrimony has
suffered from your excesses, and you will have enough for yourselves,
and for your mutual offspring. I cannot believe that, with such a
deposit intrusted to you, you will consent to bring her to misery and
ruin.

“I have one condition, however, to stipulate with you. I require of
you, as the pledge of her happiness, that you break off your present
modes of life; that you separate yourself from your connections, and
retire into the country upon your paternal estate. You are yet too
young to be in danger from that tyranny of custom, which often renders
men more advanced in life incapable of relishing the simple and
genuine pleasures. You will find contentment and joy in the society
of my daughter, and in the bosom of your rising family. You will be
happy in the circle of your own hearth, and have little to ask of the
rest of mankind. If, in any ill-omened and inauspicious moment, the
allurements of your present vices (forgive the plainness of my speech)
should resume their power over you, I hope at least that I shall never
live to see it; that I shall not be taught by bitter experience, that I
have sacrificed to the disinterestedness of my friendship the happiness
of my daughter and of my posterity!”

My heart weeps blood, while I record the admonitions of this noble
and generous man. A nobler France did not contain through all her
boundaries. Refined by literature, polished by the best society his
age could afford, grown grey in the field of honour, and particularly
distinguished by the personal attachment and confidence of his
sovereign. What was all this advice to me? What return did I make to
this unparalleled kindness and friendship? I ruined this admirable
woman! I involved her in poverty and shame! With the most savage
barbarity I prepared for her an immature grave! Can I forget this? Of
what avail to me are immortal life and immortal youth? Oh, Marguerite,
Marguerite! For ever thy image haunts me! For ever thy ghost upbraids
me! How little have I proved myself worthy of such a partner! Rather
what punishment, what plagues, what shame and detestation have I not
deserved! Praised be Heaven, the last prayer of the Marquis of Damville
at least was granted! He did not live to witness my relapse, my
profligacy, and insanity.

I resume the thread of my story.--I listened to the address of the
Marquis with reverence and admiration. I accepted his conditions with
joy. I married his adorable daughter, and conducted her to my paternal
estate in the Bourdelois. Now only it was that I tasted of perfect
happiness. To judge from my own experience in this situation, I should
say, that nature has atoned for all the disasters and miseries she so
copiously and incessantly pours upon her sons, by this one gift, the
transcendent enjoyment and nameless delights which, wherever the heart
is pure and the soul is refined, wait on the attachment of two persons
of opposite sexes. My beloved Marguerite guided and directed me, at the
same time that she was ever studying my gratification. I instructed
her by my experience, while she enlightened me by the rectitude and
decision of her taste. Ours was a sober and dignified happiness, and
its very sobriety served to give it additional voluptuousness. We
had each our separate pursuits, whether for the cultivation of our
minds, or the promotion of our mutual interests. Separation gave us
respectability in each other’s eyes, while it prepared us to enter
with fresh ardour into society and conversation. In company with each
other, hours passed over us, and appeared but minutes. It has been said
to be a peculiar felicity for any one to be praised by a man who is
himself eminently a subject of praise: how much happier to be prized
and loved by a person worthy of love? A man may be prized and valued by
his friend; but in how different a style of sentiment from the regard
and attachment that may reign in the bosom of his mistress or his wife?
Self-complacency and self-satisfaction may perhaps be numbered among
the principal sources of contentment. It is necessary for him who would
endure existence with patience, that he should conceive himself to
be something,--that he should be persuaded he is not a cipher in the
muster-roll of man. How bitter is the anguish we are sometimes doomed
to sustain in this respect from the marks we receive of other men’s
indifference and contempt? To feel that we are loved by one whose
love we have deserved, to be employed in the mutual interchange of
the marks of this love, habitually to study the happiness of one by
whom our happiness is studied in return, this is the most desirable,
as it is the genuine and unadulterated condition of human nature. I
must have some one to sympathise with; I cannot bear to be cut off
from all relations: I desire to experience a confidence, a concord,
an attachment, that cannot rise between common acquaintance. In every
state we long for some fond bosom on which to rest our weary head; some
speaking eye with which to exchange the glances of intelligence and
affection. Then the soul warms and expands itself; then it shuns the
observation of every other beholder; then it melts with feelings that
are inexpressible, but that the heart understands without the aid of
words; then the eyes swim with rapture; then the frame languishes with
enjoyment; then the soul burns with fire; then the two persons thus
blest are no longer two; distance vanishes, one thought animates, one
mind informs them. Thus love acts; thus it is ripened to perfection;
never does man feel himself so much alive, so truly etherial, as when,
bursting the bonds of diffidence, uncertainty and reserve, he pours
himself entire into the bosom of the woman he adores.

Marguerite de Damville was particularly distinguished from every other
woman I ever knew by the justness of her taste and the vividness of
her feelings. This circumstance was a fund of inexhaustible delight
and improvement to me. We were both of us well acquainted with the
most eminent poets and fine writers of modern times. But when we came
to read them together, they presented themselves in a point of view
in which they had never been seen by us before. It is, perhaps, more
important that poetry, and every thing that excites the imagination
or appeals to the heart, should be read in solitude, than in society.
But the true way to understand our author in these cases, is to employ
each of these modes in succession. The terrible, the majestic, the
voluptuous and the melting, are all of them, in a considerable degree,
affairs of sympathy; and we never judge of them so infallibly, or with
so much satisfaction, as when, in the presence of each other, the
emotion is kindled in either bosom at the same instant, the eye-beams,
pregnant with sentiment and meaning, involuntarily meet and mingle; the
voice of the reader becomes modulated by the ideas of his author, and
that of the hearer, by an accidental interjection of momentary comment
or applause, confesses its accord. It was in this manner that we read
together the admirable sonnets of Petrarch, and passed in review the
sublime effusions of Dante. The letters of Eloisa to Abelard afforded
us singular delight. We searched into the effusions of the Troubadours,
and, among all their absurdities and inequality, we found a wildness, a
daring pouring forth of the soul, an unpruned richness of imagination,
and, from time to time, a grandeur of conception and audacious
eccentricity of thought, that filled us with unlooked for transport.
At other times, when not regularly engaged in this species of reading,
we would repeat passages to each other, communicate the discoveries of
this sort that either had made in solitude, and point out unobserved
beauties, that perhaps neither of us would have remarked, but for
the suggestions of the other. It is impossible for two persons to be
constituted so much alike, but that one of them should have a more
genuine and instantaneous relish for one sort of excellence, and
another for another. Thus we added to each other’s stores, and acquired
a largeness of conception and liberality of judgment that neither of
us would have arrived at if separate. It is difficult to imagine how
prolific this kind of amusement proved of true happiness. We were
mutually delighted to remark the accord of our feelings, and still
more so, as we perceived that accord to be hourly increasing, and what
struck either as a blemish in the other, wearing out and disappearing.
We were also led by the same means to advert to the powers of mind
existing in each, the rectitude of judgment and delicacy of feeling. As
our attachment hourly increased, we rejoiced in this reciprocation of
benefits, while each gave or received something that added to value of
mind and worth of character. Mutual esteem was incessantly kept alive,
and mutual esteem is the only substantial basis of love. Each of us
hourly blessed our common lot, while each believed it impracticable
elsewhere to have found so much worth blended with so much sweetness.

But we did not confine ourselves to the library and fireside. We
walked, we rode, we travelled together; we observed together the
beauties of nature, and the system of the universe; we traversed many
provinces of France, and some parts of Italy and Spain; we examined
the characters of mankind, as they are modified by the varieties of
natural descent, or the diversities of political government. In all
this we found peculiar gratification. There is something in the scent
and impression of a balmy atmosphere, in the lustre of sunshine, in
the azure heaven and the purple clouds, in the opening of prospects on
this side and on that, in the contemplation of verdure and fertility,
and industry and simplicity and cheerfulness, in all their variations,
in the very act and exercise of travelling, peculiarly congenial to
the human frame. It expands the heart, it makes the spirit dance,
and exquisitely disposes us for social enjoyment. The mind becomes
more elevated and refined, it assumes a microscopical and unwonted
sensibility; it feels things which, in ordinary moments, are unheeded
and unknown; it enjoys things too evanescent for a name, and too minute
to be arrested; it trembles with pleasure through every fibre and every
articulation.

One thing is necessary to be mentioned in this place, though, while it
adds to the fidelity of delineation, I am aware it breaks the tone of
feeling, and the harmony of the picture. But it is not my intention
in this history to pass myself for better than I am. I have laid down
to myself the sacred maxim of absolute truth and impartiality. I must
confess, therefore, with whatever anguish, my extreme inferiority to
my incomparable partner. She had all the simplicity of genuine taste.
The more she delivered herself up to nature, the greater was her
content. All superfluous appendages and show appeared to her as so
many obstacles to enjoyment. She derived her happiness from the tone
of her own mind, and stood in no need of the gaping admiration and
stupid wonder of others to make her feel herself happy. But I retained
the original vice of my mind. The gestures of worship and the voice
of applause were necessary to me. I did not suffice to myself. I was
not satisfied with the tranquil and inglorious fruition of genuine
pleasures, forgetting the vain and anxious tumult of the world,
and forgotten by those who figured on its theatre. It may be, that
Marguerite could, and ought, by insensible degrees, to have rooted out
this disease of my mind. But I am concerned only with the statement of
facts; and I know that no such thing was the effect of our intercourse.

This absurd passion did not, however, at this time, lead me to any
fatal extremities. It contented itself with the frivolous gratification
resulting from a certain portion of ostentation and expense. I
maintained a considerable train of servants: my apartments were
magnificent, and my furniture splendid. When we travelled, it was
with an attendance little short of princely. Idiot that I was, to
regard this as an addition to the genuine pleasures which I have above
enumerated! When we were at home, every accidental guest was received
and entertained with extraordinary pomp, a pomp not directed to add to
his accommodation, but that was designed to leave him impressed with
astonishment and admiration at the spirit of his host. Often, indeed,
did I feel this ostentation an encumbrance: often did I languish for
the ease and freedom which result from a mediocrity of circumstances.
But this I called, doing honour to my ancestors and my country, and
vindicating the consideration due to the house of St. Leon.

To quit this painful recollection.--A circumstance which tended at this
time to fill the measure of my happiness, consisted in the dear pledges
which Marguerite bore me of our mutual affection. It is impossible for
him who has not experienced it, to conceive the accumulation which
a genuine tenderness derives from this source. The difficulties are
many that attend upon pregnancy; trifles are at that period sources
of fatigue and injury; it is necessary that the person should be
protected, and the mind tranquil. We love to watch over a delicate
plant, that appears to call for all our anxiety and attention. There
is in this case the sentiment, without the repulsive circumstances
that attends upon our sympathy with a dangerous and alarming disease.
Marguerite, by her sensibility and growing attachment, abundantly
rewarded my cares. At length the critical period arrives, when an event
so extraordinary occurs, as cannot fail to put the human frame in
considerable jeopardy. Never shall I forget the interview between us
immediately subsequent to her first parturition, the effusion of soul
with which we met each other after all danger seemed to have subsided,
the kindness which animated us, increased as it was by ideas of peril
and suffering, the sacred sensation with which the mother presented her
infant to her husband, or the complacency with which we read in each
other’s eyes a common sentiment of melting tenderness and inviolable
attachment!

This, she seemed to say, is the joint result of our common affection.
It partakes equally of both, and is the shrine in which our sympathies
and our life have been poured together, never to be separated. Let
other lovers testify their engagements by presents and tokens; we
record and stamp our attachment in this precious creature, a creature
of that species which is more admirable than any thing else the world
has to boast, a creature susceptible of pleasure and pain, of affection
and love, of sentiment and fancy, of wisdom and virtue. This creature
will daily stand in need of an aid we shall delight to afford; will
require our meditations and exertions to forward its improvement, and
confirm its merits and its worth. We shall each blend our exertions,
for that purpose, and our union, confirmed by this common object
of our labour and affection, will every day become more sacred and
indissoluble.--All this the present weakness of my beloved Marguerite
would not allow her to say. But all this occurred to my reflections;
and, when we had time tranquilly to compare our recollection of the
event, it plainly appeared that in all this our hearts and conceptions
had most truly sympathised.

The possessing a third object, a common centre of anxiety to both, is
far from weakening the regard of such a couple for each other. It does
not separate or divert them; it is a new link of connection. Each is
attached to it the more for the sake of either; each regards it as a
sort of branch or scion, representing the parent; each rejoices in its
health, its good humour, its smiles, its increase in size, in strength,
and in faculties, principally from the idea of the gratification
they will communicate to the other. Were it not for this idea, were
it possible the pleasure should not be mutual, the sentiment would
be stripped of its principal elevation and refinement; it would be
comparatively cold, selfish, solitary, and inane.

In the first ten years of our marriage my wife brought me five
children, two sons and three daughters. The second son only died in
his infancy. My predominant passion at this time was that of domestic
pleasures and employments, and I devoted myself, jointly with the
mother, to the cultivation of the minds of my children. They all
in a considerable degree rewarded our care; they were all amiable.
Taught by the example of their parents, they lived in uncommon
harmony and affection. Charles, the eldest, was a lad of a bold and
active disposition; but the sentiments of virtue and honour that were
infused into him, both by Marguerite and myself, found a favourable
reception, and promised to render those qualities, which, if left to
themselves, might have been turbulent and dangerous, productive of
the happiest consequences. Julia, his eldest sister, was uncommonly
mild and affectionate, alive to the slightest variations of treatment,
profoundly depressed by every mark of unkindness, but exquisitely
sensible to demonstrations of sympathy and attachment. She appeared
little formed to struggle with the difficulties of life and the frowns
of the world; but, in periods of quietness and tranquillity nothing
could exceed the sweetness of her character and the fascination of
her manners. Her chief attachment was to her mother, though she was
by no means capable of her mother’s active beneficence and heroic
fortitude. Louisa, the second daughter, resembled her mother in person,
and promised to resemble her in character. Marguerite, the youngest,
differed from the whole family, in the playfulness and frolic of her
disposition. Her vivacity was inexhaustible, and was continually
displaying itself in innocent tricks, and smart, unexpected sallies.
Nothing could possibly be more ingenuous than this admirable infant;
nothing more kind, considerate, and enthusiastic in her tenderness and
grief, when an occasion occurred to call forth these sentiments. But
the moment the sorrowful occasion was over, she would resume all her
vivacity; and even sometimes, in the midst of her tears, some trait of
her native humour would escape. I know not whether all the family were
not more attached to the little Marguerite than to any other individual
member, as she certainly oftenest contributed to their amusement and
pleasure.--Such was the amiable circle, one and all of whom have been
involved by me in the most tremendous ruin and disgrace.




CHAPTER V.


Charles was now nine years of age. His mother and myself had delighted
ourselves with observing and forwarding the opening of his infant mind,
and had hitherto been contented with the assistance of a neighbouring
priest by way of preceptor. But, as he was our only son, we were
desirous that he should obtain every advantage of education. We were
neither of us illiterate; but, in the course of twenty-three years,
which had elapsed since I was myself of Charles’s age, the progress of
literature and the literary passion in Europe had been astonishingly
great, and I was anxious that he should realise in his own person every
benefit which the fortunate and illustrious period of human affairs in
which he began to exist seemed to hold out to him. Beside, there was
an impetuosity and forwardness in his character, that seemed ill to
brook the profound solitude and retirement in which his mother and I
were contented to live. His case demanded companions of his own age, a
little world of fellow-beings, with whom he might engage in their petty
business and cares, with whose passions his own might jostle or might
sympathise, who might kindle his emulation, and open to him the field
of fraternal associations and amity.

There was, however, a considerable difficulty attendant on this
question. The schools of real literature in France, where languages
were properly taught, and science might be acquired, were at this time
exceedingly few. The nearest university was that of Toulouse, at the
distance of twenty-six leagues. This was, practically speaking, as far
from us as Paris itself. Was then our darling child to be torn from
his parents, from all he was accustomed to see, and all by whom he
was loved, to be planted in the midst of strangers, to have his mind
excited to observation, and the spirit of generous contention roused,
at the risk of suppressing the tender affections of his soul, and the
sentiments of duty, reliance, and love? There seemed, however, to be
no alternative. It was necessary that a temporary separation should
take place. Intellectual improvement was a point by all means to be
pursued; and we must direct our efforts to keep alive along with
it those winning qualities, and that softness of heart, which had
hitherto rendered Charles so eminently our delight. Such were our fond
speculations and projects for the future.

It was at length determined that I should proceed along with him to
Paris. I could there observe upon the spot the state of the university,
and the means of learning that existed in the metropolis; and could
consult with some of those eminent luminaries with whom I had become
acquainted at the house of the Marquis de Damville. Marguerite declined
accompanying me upon this occasion. Her father was dead: she could
not think of quitting her daughters for any considerable time; and
our nuptial engagement of residing always in the country gave her a
repugnance to the removing with her whole family to Paris. It was left
probable that she might come to me when the business was settled, if at
that time it was determined to leave her son at the capital; and that
she might then reconduct me to the place, which had been the scene of
all my happiness, but which I was destined never to revisit in peace.

Preliminaries being at length fully adjusted in the manner that
appeared suitable to the importance of the occasion, I set off for
the metropolis of my country, which I had seen only once, and that
for a very short period, in the course of ten years. That visit had
been produced by a very melancholy circumstance, the death of the
Marquis de Damville. Marguerite and myself had then been summoned,
and arrived at his hotel but a few days before he expired. Though
extremely weakened by the mortal disease under which he laboured, he
retained all the faculties of his mind, and conversed with us in the
most affectionate and endearing terms. He congratulated us upon our
mutual felicity; nor could the situation in which we found him, upon
the brink of an everlasting oblivion of all earthly things, abate the
sincerity and fervour of his delight. He thanked me for my carriage
and conduct as a husband, which, he said, might with propriety be
held up as a model to the human species. He applauded himself for
that mingled discernment and determination, which, as he affirmed,
had so opportunely secured my virtue and his daughter’s happiness. He
trusted that I was now sufficiently weaned from those habits which had
formerly given him so much alarm. At the same time he conjured me, by
every motive that an overflowing enthusiasm could suggest, to persist
in my good resolutions, and never to change that residence, where I
had found every degree of delight of which the human mind is in its
present condition susceptible. “Do not,” said he, “be drawn aside by
ambition; do not be dazzled by the glitter of idle pomp and decoration;
do not enter the remotest circle of the vortex of dissipation! Live in
the midst of your family; cultivate domestic affection; be the solace
and joy of your wife; watch for the present and future welfare of your
children; and be assured that you will then be found no contemptible or
unbeneficial member of the community at large!”

Such were the last advices of the Marquis de Damville. Excellent
man! how ill were your lessons remembered! how ill your kindness
remunerated! He died in the sixth year of our marriage. The serious
impression which this event produced in my mind gave me small
inclination to enter into any species of society, and disposed me to
quit Paris as soon as every respect had been paid to the obsequies of
the deceased.

Upon my arrival in the metropolis on the present occasion, I
immediately sought to renew my acquaintance with those amiable and
eminent persons, who had for the most part constituted the circle
of the Marquis de Damville. They received me with that interest and
attention that I have usually found attendant on a cultivated mind. The
pleasure was considerable, that resulted from meeting them thus again,
after ten years’ cessation of intercourse. A few of them, indeed, were
dead, and others dispersed by various accidents in different parts
of France or of Europe. The greater part, however, I still found in
that celebrated city, which might well be considered as the metropolis
of the civilised world. The king had early been distinguished by his
love of letters and the arts; and added years, while they abated in
his mind the eagerness of ambition and glory, gave new strength to
his more cultivated propensities. The liberality of his conduct, and
the polished ease that characterised his manners, produced a general
predilection in favour of the capital in which he resided.

I found all my former friends matured and improved by the silent
influence of time. Their knowledge was increased; their views rendered
wider; their conversation was more amusing and instructive, their
manners more bland and unaffected. But, if their characters had
experienced revolution, mine was more materially changed. I had before
encountered them with all the heat and presumption of youth, with no
views so much present to my mind as those of chivalry and a factitious
honour, with no experience but that of a camp. I was impetuous,
volatile, and dissipated. I had not rested long enough upon any one of
the flowers of intellect to extract its honey; and my mind was kept in
a state of preternatural agitation by the passions of a gamester. It
was now become cool, moderate, and tranquil. The society of Marguerite
had contributed much to the improvement of my character; I had lived
in no idle and brutish solitude, but in the midst of contemplation
and letters; and I had the passions of a husband and a father, in the
extremest degree attached to his family. These passions will be found,
perhaps, to be the true school of humanity: the man, whose situation
continually exercises in him the softest and most amiable charities of
our nature, will almost infallibly surpass his brethren in kindness to
sympathise with, and promptness to relieve, the distresses of others.

Will it be accounted strange that, in Paris, surrounded by persons of
various knowledge and liberal benevolence, I found myself under the
influence of other feelings, than any I had lately experienced? I was
like a man who had suffered long calamity in a famished vessel or a
town besieged, and is immediately after introduced into the midst of
luxury, to a table loaded with the most costly dainties. Every viand
has to his apprehension an exquisite relish, and every wine a delicious
flavour, that he never perceived in them before. Let no one infer that
my love for Marguerite was diminished; it has already sufficiently
appeared in the course of my narrative, that no happiness could be more
consummate than mine was with this admirable woman. Had I been called
upon to choose for the seat of my future life, between my paternal
château in the Bordelois, with Marguerite to grace my abode, on the
one hand; and all the gratifications that Paris could afford, on the
other, I should not have hesitated even for an instant. But the mind
of man is made capacious of various pleasures; and a person of sound
and uncorrupted judgment will perhaps always enjoy with emotion the
delights which for a long time before he had not encountered, however
enviable his content may have been under their absence. I delighted
to converse with the men of genius and refinement with whom Paris
at this time abounded. It was a feast of soul of which I had rarely
partaken in my rural retreat. I delighted to combine excellence with
number, and, to a considerable degree at least, variety of intercourse
with sentiments of regard and friendship. In these select societies I
found no cold suppressions and reserve. Their members were brethren
in disposition, similar in their pursuits, and congenial in their
sentiments. When any one spoke, it was that the person to whom he
addressed himself might apprehend what was passing in his thoughts.
They participated with sincerity and a liberal mind in each other’s
feelings, whether of gay delight or melancholy disappointment.

Thus situated, I forgot for a time my engagements with Marguerite. The
scenes of St. Leon, its fields, its walks, its woods and its streams,
faded from my mind. I forgot the pleasure with which I had viewed my
children sporting on the green, and the delicious, rural suppers which
I had so often partaken with my wife beneath my vines and my fig-trees
at the period of the setting sun. When I set out for Paris, these
images had dwelt upon my mind, and saddened my fancy. At every stage
I felt myself removed still further from the scene where my treasures
and my affections were deposited. But, shortly after, new scenes and
new employments engaged my thoughts. The pleasures which I sought but
weakly at first, every time they were tasted increased my partiality
for them. I seemed for a time to be under the influence of an oblivion
of my former life. Thus circumstanced, the folly which had so deep a
root in my character, took hold of me. I hired a magnificent hotel,
and entertained at my own expense those persons in whose society I
principally delighted. My circles became more numerous than those of
the Marquis de Damville, and were conducted in a very different style
of splendour and profusion. I corresponded with Marguerite; but I
continually found some new pretext for lengthening my stay; and she
on her part, though the kindest and most indulgent of women, became
seriously alarmed and unhappy.

As my parties were more numerous than those of the Marquis de Damville
had been, they were more mixed. Among others, I occasionally associated
with some of those noblemen who had been the companions of my former
dissipation and gaming. An obvious consequence resulted from this.
Parties of play were occasionally proposed to me. I resisted--I
yielded. My first compliances were timid, hesitating, and painful. I
recollected the lessons and exhortations of my excellent father-in-law.
At length, however, my alarms abated. I reproached myself with the want
of an honourable confidence in my own firmness, and the cowardice of
supposing that I was not to be trusted with the direction of my conduct.

One evening I ventured beyond the cautious limits I had at first
prescribed myself, and won a considerable sum. This incident produced
a strong impression upon me, and filled my mind with tumult and
agitation. There was a secret that I had concealed almost from myself,
but which now recurred to me with tenfold violence. I was living beyond
the means I had to discharge my expenses. My propensity of this sort
seemed to be fatal and irresistible. My marriage with Marguerite had
occurred opportunely, to heal the breaches I had at that time made in
my fortune, and to take from me the consciousness of embarrassments
which I should otherwise have deeply felt. The death of the Marquis,
however deplorable in other respects, happened at a period when the
spirit of profusion and magnificence which characterised me had again
involved my affairs in considerable difficulty. It might be supposed
that these two cases of experience would have sufficed to extirpate
my folly; but they had rather the contrary effect. In each of them
the event was such as to prevent extravagance and thoughtlessness
from producing their genuine results; and, of consequence, they
appeared less criminal and mischievous in my eyes than otherwise they
probably would have appeared. I rather increased than diminished my
establishment upon the death of my father-in-law. I had no reasonable
prospect of any property hereafter to descend to me, that should
exonerate me from the consequences of further prodigality. But I did
not advert to this. I saw myself surrounded by my children; they were
the delight and solace of my life; and yet I was needless of their
interests. Sometimes I resolved upon a more rigid economy: but economy
is a principle that does not easily lay hold of any but a heart framed
to receive it. It is a business of attentive and vigilant detail. It
easily escapes the mind, amidst the impetuosity of the passions, the
obstinacy of rooted propensities, and the seduction of long established
habits. Marguerite, indeed, did not share with me in these follies; the
simplicity and ingenuousness of her mind were such, that she would have
been as happy in a cottage as a palace; but, though she did not partake
my vices, an ill-judged forbearance and tenderness for my feelings did
not permit her effectually to counteract them. This is, perhaps, the
only defect of character I am able to impute to her.

After I had won the sum to which I have alluded, I retired to my
hotel full of anxious thoughts. It produced upon me, in some degree,
the same effect as ordinarily belongs to a great calamity. I lay all
night sleepless and disturbed. Ruin and despair presented themselves
to my mind in a thousand forms. Heedless prodigality and dilapidated
revenues passed in review before me. I counted the years of my life.
I had completed the thirty-second year of my age: this was scarcely
half the probable duration of human existence. How was I to support
the remaining period, a period little assorted to difficulties and
expedients; and which, in the close of it, seems imperiously to call
for every indulgence? Hitherto, an interval of four or five years had
repeatedly sufficed to involve me in serious embarrassment. My children
were growing up around me; my family was likely to become still larger;
as my offspring increased in years, their demands upon my revenues
would be more considerable. Were these demands to be slighted? Were my
daughters, nay, was the heir of my rank and my name, to be committed to
the compassion of the world, unprovided and forlorn? What a cheerless
prospect! What a gloomy and disconsolate hue did these ideas spread
upon that future, which the health of the human mind requires to have
gilded with the beams of hope and expectation? I had already tried the
expedient of economy; and I had uniformly found this inestimable and
only sheet-anchor of prudence gliding from my deluded grasp. Could I
promise myself better success in future? There seemed to be something
in my habits, whether of inattention, ostentation, or inconsistency,
that baffled the strongest motives by which parsimony and frugality can
be enforced.

Why did these thoughts importunately recur to me in the present
moment? They were the suggestions of a malignant genius,--thoughts,
the destination of which was to lead me into a gulf of misery and
guilt! While I was going on in a regular train of expense, while I was
scooping the mine that was to swallow me and my hopes together, I had
the art to keep these reflections at bay. Now that I had met with an
unexpected piece of good fortune, they rushed upon me with irresistible
violence. Unfortunate coincidence! Miserable,--rather let me say,
guilty, abandoned miscreant!

As soon as I rose in the morning, I went to the closet where, the
evening before, I had deposited my recent acquisitions. I spread out
the gold before me. I gazed upon it with intentness. My eyes, a moment
after, rolled in vacancy. I traversed the apartment with impatient
steps. All the demon seemed to make his descent upon my soul. This was
the first time that I had ever felt the struggle of conscious guilt and
dishonour. I was far indeed from anticipating that species of guilt,
and that species of ruin, which soon after overwhelmed me. My mind did
not once recur to the possibility of any serious mischief. I dwelt
only, as gamesters perhaps usually do, upon the alternative between
acquisition and no acquisition. I did not take into the account the
ungovernableness of my own passions. I assumed it as unquestionable,
that I could stop when I pleased. The thoughts that tortured me were,
in the first place, those of a sanguine and unexperienced adventurer
in a lottery, whose mind rests not for a moment upon the sum he has
risked, but who, having in fancy the principal prize already in his
possession, and having distributed it to various objects and purposes,
sometimes fearfully recurs to the possibility of his disappointment,
and anticipates with terror what will be his situation, if deprived of
this imaginary wealth. I had now, for the first time, opened my eyes to
the real state of my affairs, and I clung with proportionable vehemence
to this plank which was to bear me from the storm. In the second place,
I felt, though darkly and unwillingly, the immorality of my conception.
To game may, in some instances, not be in diametrical opposition
to liberality of mind; but he who games for the express purpose of
improving his circumstances must be an idiot, if he does not sometimes
recollect that the money lost may be as serious a mischief to his
neighbour, as the money gained can possibly be a benefit to himself.
It is past a question, that he who thus turns his amusement into his
business loses the dignity of a man of honour, and puts himself upon a
level with the most avaricious and usurious merchant.

Though I was far from having digested a specific plan of enriching
myself by these discreditable means, yet the very tumult of my thoughts
operated strongly to lead me once more to the gaming-table. I was in no
humour to busy myself with my own thoughts; the calmness of literary
discussion, and the polished interchange of wit, which had lately so
much delighted me, had now no attraction for my heart; the turbulence
of a scene of high play alone had power to distract my attention
from the storm within. I won a second time. I felt the rapidity and
intenseness of my contemplations still further accelerated. I will not
over again detail what they were. Suffice it to say, that my hopes
became more ardent, my conception of the necessity of this resource
more impressive, and my alarm lest this last expedient should fail me
more tormenting.

The next time I lost half as much as the sum of my winnings. I then
proceeded for several days in a nearly regular alternation of gain
and loss. This, as soon as the fact unavoidably forced itself upon my
mind, only served to render my thoughts more desperate. No, exclaimed
I, it was not for this that I entered upon so tormenting a pursuit.
It is not for this that I have deserted the learned societies which
were lately my delight, and committed myself to a sea of disquiet and
anxiety. I came not here, like a boy, for amusement; or, like one who
has been bred in the lap of ignorance and wealth, to seek a relief from
the burden of existence, and to find a stimulus to animate my torpid
spirits. Am I then to be for ever baffled? Am I to cultivate a tract of
land, which is to present me nothing in return but unvaried barenness?
Am I continually to wind up my passions, and new-string my attention
in vain? Am I a mere instrument to be played upon by endless hopes and
fears and tormenting wishes? Am I to be the sport of events, the fool
of promise, always agitated with near approaching good, yet always
deluded?

This frame of mind led me on insensibly to the most extravagant
adventures. It threw me in the first place into the hands of notorious
gamblers. Men of real property shrunk from the stakes I proposed; as,
though they were in some degree infected with the venom of gaming,
their infection was not so deep as mine, nor with my desperation of
thought. The players with whom I engaged were for the most part well
known to every one but myself, not to be able to pay the sums they
played for, if they lost; nay, this fact might be said in some sense
to be known to me as well as the rest, though I obstinately steeled
myself against the recollection of it. One evening I won of one of
these persons a very large sum, for which I suffered him to play with
me upon honour. The consequence was simple. The next morning he took
his departure from Paris, and I heard of him no more.

Before this, however, the tide of success had set strongly against me.
I had sustained some serious vicissitudes; and, while I was playing
with the wretch I have just mentioned, my eagerness increased as my
good luck began, and I flattered myself that I should now avenge myself
of fortune for some of her late unkindnesses. My anguish--why should
I call the thing by a disproportionate and trivial appellation?--my
agony--was by so much the greater, when I found that this person, the
very individual who had already stripped me of considerable sums, had
disappeared, and left me without the smallest benefit from my imaginary
winnings.

No man who has not felt, can possibly image to himself the tortures of
a gamester, of a gamester like me, who played for the improvement of
his fortune, who played with the recollection of a wife and children
dearer to him than the blood that bubbled through the arteries of his
heart, who might be said, like the savages of ancient Germany, to
make these relations the stake for which he threw, who saw all my own
happiness and all theirs through the long vista of life, depending
on the turn of a card! Hell is but the chimera of priests, to bubble
idiots and cowards. What have they invented, to come into competition
with what I felt! Their alternate interchange of flames and ice is but
a feeble image of the eternal varieties of hope and fear. All bodily
racks and torments are nothing compared with certain states of the
human mind. The gamester would be the most pitiable, if he were not the
most despicable creature that exists. Arrange ten bits of painted paper
in a certain order, and he is ready to go wild with the extravagance of
his joy. He is only restrained by some remains of shame, from dancing
about the room, and displaying the vileness of his spirit by every
sort of freak and absurdity. At another time, when his hopes have been
gradually worked up into a paroxysm, an unexpected turn arrives, and
he is made the most miserable of men. Never shall I cease to recollect
the sensation I have repeatedly felt, in the instantaneous sinking of
the spirits, the conscious fire that spread over my visage, the anger
in my eye, the burning dryness of my throat, the sentiment that in a
moment was ready to overwhelm with curses the cards, the stake, my
own existence, and all mankind. How every malignant and insufferable
passion seemed to rush upon my soul! What nights of dreadful solitude
and despair did I repeatedly pass during the progress of my ruin!
It was the night of the soul! My mind was wrapped in a gloom that
could not be pierced! My heart was oppressed with a weight that no
power human or divine was equal to remove! My eyelids seemed to press
downward with an invincible burden! My eyeballs were ready to start and
crack their sockets! I lay motionless, the victim of ineffable horror!
The whole endless night seemed to be filled with one vast, appalling,
immovable idea! It was a stupor, more insupportable and tremendous than
the utmost whirl of pain, or the fiercest agony of exquisite perception!

One day that my mind was in a state of excessive anguish and remorse
(I had already contrived by this infernal means to dispossess myself
of the half of my property), my son came unexpectedly into my chamber.
For some time I had scarcely ever seen him: such is a gamester! All the
night, while he slept, I was engaged in these haunts of demons. All
the day, while he was awake, and studying with his masters, or amusing
himself, I was in my bed-chamber, endeavouring to court a few broken
hours of sleep. When, notwithstanding the opposition of our habits, I
had the opportunity of seeing him, I rather shunned to use, than sought
to embrace it. The sight of him had a savour of bitterness in it, that
more than balanced all the solace of natural affection. It brought
before me the image of his mother and his sisters; it presented to
my soul a frightful tale of deserted duties; it was more galling and
envenomed than the sting of scorpions.

Starting at the sound of the opening door, I called out abruptly, and
with some harshness, “Who is there? What do you want?”

“It is I, sir,” replied the boy; “it is Charles, come to pay his duty
to you!”

“I do not want you now; you should not come, but when you know I am at
leisure,” answered I somewhat disturbed.

“Very well, sir; very well: I am going.” As he spoke his voice seemed
suffocated with tears. He was on the point of shutting the door, and
leaving me to myself.

“Charles!” said I, not well knowing what it was I intended to do.

He returned.

“Come here, my dear boy!”

I took his hand, I drew him between my knees, I hid my face in his
neck, I shook with the violence of my emotion.

“Go, go, boy: you perceive I cannot talk to you.”

I pushed him gently from me.

“Papa!” cried he, “I do not like to leave you. I know I am but a boy,
and can be but of little use to you. If mamma were with you, I would
not be troublesome. I should cry when I saw you were grieved, but I
would ask no questions, and would leave you, because you desired it. I
hope you have not had any bad news?”

“No, my boy, no. Come to me to-morrow, and I will be at leisure, and
will talk a great deal to you.”

“Ah, papa, to-morrow! Every day that I did not see you, I thought it
would be to-morrow! And there was one to-morrow, and another to-morrow,
and so many, that it seemed as if you had forgotten to speak to me at
all.”

“Why, Charles, you do not doubt my word? I tell you that to-morrow you
shall see me as long as you please.”

“Well, well, I will wait! But do then let it be all day! I will not go
to college, and it shall be a holiday. Papa, I do not like my lessons
half so well as I did, since I have neither you nor mamma that I can
tell what they are about.”

“Good-bye, Charles! Be a good boy! remember to-morrow! Good-bye!”

“Papa! now I am sure you look a good deal better than you did at first.
Let me tell you something about the lesson I read this morning. It was
a story of Zaleucus the Locrian, who put out one of his own eyes, that
he might preserve eye-sight to his son.”

This artless story, thus innocently introduced, cut me to the soul. I
started in my chair, and hid my face upon the table.

“Papa, what is the matter? Indeed you frighten me!”

“Zaleucus was a father! What then am I?”

“Yes, Zaleucus was very good indeed! But, do you know, his son was very
naughty. It was his disobedience and wickedness that made him liable to
such a punishment. I would not for the world be like Zaleucus’s son. I
hope, papa, you will never suffer from my wilfulness. You shall not,
papa, indeed, indeed!”

I caught the boy in my arms. “No, you are very good! you are too good!
I cannot bear it!”

“Well, papa, I wish I were able to show you that I love you as well as
ever Zaleucus loved his son!”

I was melted with the ingenuousness of the boy’s expression. I quitted
him. I paced up and down the room. Suddenly, as if by paroxysm of
insanity, I seized my child by the arm, I seated myself, I drew him
towards me, I put my eye upon him.

“Boy, how dare you talk to me of Zaleucus? Do you mean to insinuate
a reproach? Do I not discharge a father’s duty? If I do not, know,
urchin, I will not be insulted by my child!”

The boy was astonished. He burst into tears, and was silent.

I was moved by his evident distress. “No, child, you have no father. I
am afraid you have not. You do not know my baseness. You do not know
that I am the deadliest foe you have in the world.”

“Dear papa, do not talk thus! Do not I know that you are the best
of men? Do not I love you and mamma better than every body else put
together?”

“Well, Charles,” cried I, endeavouring to compose myself, “we will talk
no more now. Did not I tell you, you should not come to me but when you
knew it was a proper time? I hope you will never have reason to hate
me.”

“I never will hate you, papa, do to me what you will!”

He saw I wished to be alone, and left me.




CHAPTER VI.


In the evening of the same day, my beloved Marguerite arrived
unexpectedly at Paris. In the beginning of our separation, I had
been to the last degree punctual in my letters. I had no pleasure
so great, as retiring to my closet, and pouring out my soul to the
most adorable of women. By degrees I relaxed in punctuality. Ordinary
occupations, however closely pursued, have a method in them, that
easily combines with regularity in points of an incidental nature. But
gaming, when pursued with avidity, subverts all order, and forces
every avocation from the place assigned it. When my insane project of
supplying the inadequateness of my fortune by this expedient began
to produce an effect exactly opposite, I could not, but with the
extremest difficulty, string my mind to write to the mistress of my
soul. I endeavoured not to think, with distinctness and attention, of
the persons whose happiness was most nearly involved with mine. I said
to myself, Yet another venture must be tried; fortune shall change
the animosity with which she has lately pursued me; I will repair the
breaches that have been sustained; and I shall then return with tenfold
avidity to subjects that at present I dare not fix my mind upon. My
letters were accordingly short, unfrequent, and unsatisfactory; and
those of Marguerite discovered increasing anguish, perturbation, and
anxiety. What a change in the minds of both had the lapse of a few
months produced! Not that my attachment had suffered the diminution
of a single particle; but that attachment, which had lately been the
source of our mutual felicity, was now fraught only with distress.
My mind was filled with horrors; and Marguerite expected from me an
encouragement and consolation in absence, which, alas, I had it not in
my power to give!

I had now continued in Paris for a time vastly greater than I had
originally proposed. After having remained more than ten days without
receiving one word of intelligence, a letter of mine was delivered to
Marguerite, more short, mysterious, and distressing to her feelings,
than any that had preceded. The ten days’ silence, from me who at
first had never missed an opportunity of pouring out my soul to her,
and contributing to her pleasure, was exquisitely painful. There
is scarcely any thing that produces such a sickness of the heart
as the repeated prorogation of hope. But, when the letter arrived
that had been so anxiously looked for, when the hand-writing of the
superscription was recognised, when the letter was treasured up for the
impatiently desired moment of solitude, that the sacred emotions of
the heart might suffer no interruption, and when it at last appeared
so cold, so ominous, so withering to the buds of affection, the
determination of Marguerite was speedily formed. The relations that
bound us together were of too mighty a value to be dispensed or to be
trifled with. She felt them as the very cords of existence. For ten
years she had known no solace that was disconnected from my idea, no
care but of our own happiness and that of our offspring. Benevolent
she was almost beyond human example, and interested for the welfare of
all she knew; but these were brief and mutable concerns; they were not
incorporated with the stamina of her existence. I was the whole world
to her; she had no idea of satisfaction without me. Her firmness had
been sufficiently tried by the interposal of separation and absence.
How was she to interpret the obscurity that had now arisen? Had I
forgotten my family and my wife? Had I been corrupted and debauched by
that Paris, the effects of which upon my character her father had so
deeply apprehended? Had I, in contempt of every thing sacred, entered
into some new attachment? Had the attractions of some new beauty in the
metropolis made me indifferent to the virtue of my children, and the
life of their mother? Perhaps the length of our attachment had infected
me with satiety, and the inconstancy of my temper had been roused by
the charms of novelty. Perhaps the certainty of her kindness and regard
had no longer allurements for me; and I might be excited to the pursuit
of another by the pleasures of hope combined with uncertainty, and of
a coyness, that seemed to promise compliance hereafter, even while it
pronounced a present denial. These were the images that haunted her
mind; they engendered all the wildness, and all the torments, of a
delirious paroxysm; she resolved that no time should be sacrificed to
needless uncertainty, and that no effort of hers should be unexerted to
prevent the mischief she feared.

It was evening when she arrived. I was upon the point of repairing to
that scene of nightly resort, the source of all my guilt and all my
miseries. I enquired of my son’s valet where he was, and how he had
been in the course of the day. He was gone to bed: he had appeared
unusually sad, sometimes in tears; and, while he was undressing, had
sighed deeply two or three times. While I was collecting this account
in my own apartment, the gates of the hotel opened, and a number of
horsemen entered the court-yard. I was somewhat surprised; because,
though I was accustomed to see much company, few of my acquaintance
visited me at so late an hour, except on the evenings appropriated to
receive them. I crossed the saloon to enquire. One of the servants
exclaimed, “It is Bernardin’s voice: it must be my mistress that is
come!”

Nothing could be further from my mind than the thought of her arrival.
I flew through the passage; I was on the spot the moment that the
servant prepared to conduct his mistress from the litter; I received
Marguerite in my arms, and led her into the house. If I had expected
her arrival, I should infallibly have met her at this moment with
anxiety and confusion; I should have gone round the circle of my
thoughts, and should not have had confidence to encounter the beam of
her eye. But the event was so unexpected as to drive all other ideas
from my mind; and, in consequence, I enjoyed several minutes,--ages,
rather let me say,--of the sincerest transport. I kissed the mistress
of my soul with ecstasy; I gazed upon her well known lineaments and
features; I listened to the pleasing melody of her voice; I was
intoxicated with delight. Upon occasions like this, it seems as if
every former joy that had marked the various periods of intercourse
distilled its very spirit and essence, to compose a draught, ten times
more delicious and refined than had ever before been tasted. Our
meeting was like awaking from the dead; it was the emancipation of the
weary captive, who exchanges the dungeon’s gloom for the lustre of the
morning, and who feels a celestial exhilaration of heart, the very
memory of which had been insensibly wearing away from his treacherous
brain. All my senses partook of the rapture. Marguerite seemed to shed
ambrosial odours round her; her touch was thrilling; her lips were
nectar; her figure was that of a descended deity!

Her pleasure was not less than mine. It is indeed absurd, it may
be termed profanation, to talk of solitary pleasure. No sensation
ordinarily distinguished by that epithet can endure the test of a
moment’s inspection, when compared with a social enjoyment. It is then
only that a man is truly pleased, when pulse replies to pulse, when
the eyes discourse eloquently to each other, when in responsive tones
and words the soul is communicated. Altogether, we are conscious of a
sober, a chaste, and dignified intoxication, an elevation of spirit,
that does not bereave the mind of itself, and that endures long enough
for us to analyse and savour the causes of our joy.

For some time we rested on a sofa, each filled and occupied with the
observation of the other. My eyes assured Marguerite of the constancy
of my affection; my kisses were those of chaste, undivided, entire
attachment.

Our words were insignificant and idle, the broken and incoherent
phrases of a happiness that could not be silent. At length Marguerite
exclaimed, “It is enough; my fears are vanished; I have no questions
to ask, no doubts to remove. Yet why, my Reginald, did you suffer
those doubts to gather, those fears to accumulate? Surely you knew the
singleness of my affection! How many painful days and hours might you
have saved me, almost by a word!”

“Forgive me, my love,” replied I. “Waste not the golden hour of meeting
in recrimination! Feeling, as your angelic goodness now makes me feel,
I wonder at myself, that I could for one moment have consented to
separation; that I could have thought any thing but this existence; or
that, having experienced the joys that you have bestowed, I could lose
all image of the past, and, dwelling in a desert, imagine it paradise!”

“Recrimination!” rejoined Marguerite. “No, my love; you make me too
happy to leave room for any thing but gratitude and affection! Forgive
me, Reginald, if I pretend that, in meeting you thus, I find myself
your superior in happiness and love. You only awake from lethargy,
forgetfulness of yourself and--of me; but I awake from anguish, a
separation, that I desired not at first, and of which I hourly wished
to see an end, from doubts that would intrude, and refused to be
expelled, from the incessant contemplation and regret of a felicity,
once possessed, but possessed no longer! Melancholy ideas, gloomy
prognostics overspread my sleepless nights, and bedewed my pillow
with tears! This it is, that, at last, has driven me from my family
and daughters, resolved to obtain the certainty of despair, or the
dispersion of my fears! Have I known all this, and think you that I do
not enjoy with rapture this blissful moment?”

While we were thus conversing, Charles entered the room. He was not
yet asleep when his mother arrived: he heard her voice; and hastened
to put on his clothes, that he might rush into her arms. The pleasure
Marguerite had conceived from our meeting, and the affectionate
serenity that had taken possession of her soul, infused double ardour
into the embraces she bestowed on her son. He gazed earnestly in her
face; he kissed her with fervency; but was silent.

“Why, Charles!” said she, “what is the matter with you? Are not you
glad to see me?”

“That I am, mamma! So glad, that I do not know what to do with myself!
I was afraid I never should have been glad again!”

“Pooh, boy! what do you mean? You were not mother-sick, were you?”

“Yes, indeed, I was sick, sick at heart! Not that I am a coward! I
think that I could have been satisfied to have been without either my
father or you for a little while. But papa is so altered, you cannot
think! He never smiles and looks happy; and, when I see him, instead of
making me joyful, as it used to do, it makes me sad!”

“Dear Reginald!” replied the mother, looking at me, “is it possible
that, while my heart was haunted with fear and suspicions, separation
alone should have had such an effect on you?”

“I dare say it was that,” interposed the boy. “I could not make papa
smile, all I could do: but, now you are come, he will soon be well! How
much he must love you, mamma!”

The artless prattle of my son struck anguish to my soul; and awakened a
whole train of tormenting thoughts. Alas! thought I, can it indeed be
love, that thus contrives against the peace of its object? Would to
God, my child! that my thoughts were as simple and pure as thy innocent
bosom!

“And yet,” added the boy, as if recollecting himself, “if he could not
see you, sure that was no reason for him to avoid me? He seemed as
much afraid of me, as I have seen some of my play-fellows of a snake!
Indeed, mamma, it was a sad thing that, when I wanted him to kiss me
and press me to his bosom, he shrunk away from me! There now! it was
just so, as he looks now, that papa used to frown upon me, I cannot
tell how often! Now is not that ugly, mamma?”

I could no longer govern the tumult of my thoughts. “Peace, urchin!”
cried I. “Why did you come to mar the transport of our meeting? Just
now, Marguerite, I forgot myself, and was happy! Now all the villain
rises in my soul!”

My wife was so astonished at the perturbation of my manner, and at the
words I uttered, that she was scarcely able to articulate. “Reginald!”
in broken accents she exclaimed--“my love!--my husband!”

“No matter,” said I. “It shall yet be well! My heart assures me it
shall!--Be not disturbed, my love! I will never cause you a moment’s
anguish! I would sooner die a thousand deaths!--Forget the odious
thoughts that poor Charles has excited in me so unseasonably! They were
mere idle words! Depend upon it they were!”

While I was speaking, Marguerite hid her face upon the sofa. I took
her hand, and by my caresses endeavoured to soothe and compose her. At
length, turning to me,--“Reginald!” said she, in a voice of anguish,
“do you then endeavour to hide from me the real state of your thoughts?
Was the joy that attended our meeting perishable and deceitful? After
ten years of unbounded affection and confidence, am I denied to be the
partner of your bosom?”

“No, Marguerite, no! this was but the thought of a moment! By
to-morrow’s dawn it shall have no existence in my bosom. Why should
I torment you with what so soon shall have no existence to myself?
Meanwhile, be assured, my love (instead of suffering diminution) is
more full, more fervent and entire, than it ever was!”

At this instant my mind experienced an extraordinary impression.
Instead of being weaned, by the presence of this admirable woman, from
my passion for gaming, it became stronger than ever. If Charles had
not entered at the critical moment he did, I should have remained with
Marguerite, and, amidst the so long untasted solace of love, have,
at least for this night, forgotten my cares. But that occurrence had
overturned every thing, had uncovered the wounds of my bosom, and
awakened conceptions that refused to be laid to sleep again. The arms
of my wife, that were about to embrace me, suddenly became to me a
nest of scorpions. I could as soon have rested and enjoyed myself upon
the top of Vesuvius, when it flamed. New as I was to this species of
anguish, tranquilly and full of virtuous contentment as I had hitherto
passed the years of my married state, the pangs of a guilty conscience
I was wholly unable to bear. I rose from my seat, and was upon the
point of quitting the room.

Marguerite perceived by my manner that there was something
extraordinary passing in my mind. “Where are you going, Reginald?” said
she.

I answered with a slight nod. “Not far,” I replied, attempting an air
of apathy and unconcern.

She was not satisfied. “You are not going out?” she enquired.

I returned to where I had been sitting. “My love, I was going out at
the moment of your arrival. It is necessary, I assure you. I hope I
shall soon be back. I am sorry I am obliged to leave you. Compose
yourself. You are in want of rest, and had better go to bed.”

“Stop, Reginald! Afford me a minute’s leisure before you depart! Leave
us, Charles! Good night, my dear boy! Kiss me; remember that your
mother is now in the same house with you; and sleep in peace.”

The boy quitted the room.

“Reginald!” said the mother, “I have no wish to control your desires,
or be a spy upon your actions; but your conduct seems so extraordinary
in this instance, as to dispense me from the observation of common
rules. I have always been a complying wife; I have never set myself
in contradiction to your will; I appeal to yourself for the truth
of this. I despise, however, those delicacies, an adherence to which
would entail upon us the sacrifice of all that is most valuable in
human life. Can I shut my ears upon the mysterious expressions which
Charles’s complaints have extorted from you? Can I be insensible to the
extraordinary purpose you declare of leaving me, when I have yet been
scarcely half an hour under the roof with you? Before Charles came in,
you seem to have entertained no such design.”

“My love,” replied I, “how seriously you comment upon the most
insignificant incident! Is it extraordinary that your unexpected
arrival should at first have made me forget an engagement that I now
recollect?”

“St. Leon,” answered my wife, “before you indulge in surprise at my
earnestness, recollect the circumstances that immediately preceded
it. Through successive weeks I have waited for some satisfactory and
agreeable intelligence from you. I had a right before this to have
expected your return. Uncertainty and a thousand fearful apprehensions
have at length driven me from my home, and brought me to Paris. I
am come here for satisfaction to my doubts, and peace to my anxious
heart. Wonder not, therefore, if you find something more earnest and
determined in my proceedings now, than upon ordinary occasions. Give
me, I conjure you, give me ease and relief, if you are able! If not, at
least allow me this consolation, to know the worst!”

“Be pacified, Marguerite!” I rejoined. “I am grieved, Heaven knows how
deeply grieved, to have occasioned you a moment’s pain. But, since
you lay so much stress upon this circumstance, depend upon it, I will
postpone the business I was going about, and stay with you.”

This concession, voluntary and sincere, produced an effect that I had
not foreseen. Marguerite gazed for a moment in my face, and then threw
herself upon my neck.

“Forgive me, my beloved husband!” she cried. “You indeed make me
ashamed of myself. I feel myself inexcusable. I feel that I have been
brooding over imaginary evils, and creating the misery that corroded my
heart. How inexpressibly you rise my superior! But I will conquer my
weakness. I insist upon your going to the engagement you have made, and
will henceforth place the most entire confidence in your prudence and
honour.”

Every word of this speech was a dagger to my heart. What were my
feelings, while this admirable woman was taking shame to herself
for her suspicions, and pouring out her soul in commendation of my
integrity! I looked inward, and found every thing there the reverse
of her apprehension, a scene of desolation and remorse. I embraced
her in silence. My heart panted upon her bosom, and seemed bursting
with a secret that it was death to reveal. I ought, in return for her
generosity, to have given up my feigned engagement, and devoted this
night at least to console and pacify her. But I could not, and I dared
not. The wound of my bosom was opened, and would not be closed. The
more I loved her for her confidence, the less I could endure myself in
her presence. To play the hypocrite for so many hours, to assume a face
of tranquillity and joy while all within was tumult and horror, was a
task too mighty for human powers to execute. I accepted of Marguerite’s
permission, and left her. Even in the short interval before I quitted
the house, my carriage was near to betraying me. I could perceive her
watchful of my countenance, as if again suspicious that some fatal
secret lurked in my mind. She said nothing further upon the subject
however, and I presently escaped the inquisition of her eye.

It is scarcely necessary to describe the state of my mind as I passed
along the streets. It is sufficient to say that every thing I had felt
before from the passion of gaming was trivial to the sensations that
now occupied me. Now first it stood confessed before me, a demon that
poisoned all my joys, that changed the transport of a meeting with
the adored of my soul into anguish, that drove me forth from her yet
untasted charms a solitary wanderer on the face of the earth. My busy
soul drew forth at length the picture of what this encounter would have
been, if it had been sanctified with the stamp of conscious innocence.
At one moment I felt myself the most accursed of mankind; I believed
that he who could find, as I did, barrenness and blasting in the
choicest of Heaven’s blessings, must be miserable beyond precedent
or hope. Shortly after, however, I reviewed again the image of my
poison, and found in it the promise of a cure. The more desperate my
case appeared to me, with the greater insanity of expectation did I
assure myself that this one night should retrieve all my misfortunes.
In giving to it this destination indeed, I should afflict the gentle
bosom of my wife but too probably with some hours of uneasiness. But
the event would richly repay her for so transitory a suffering; I would
then open my whole mind to her. I would practise no more reserves; I
should no longer be driven to the refuge of a vile hypocrisy. I would
bid farewell to the frowns and the caresses of fortune. I would require
of her no further kindnesses. If I were incapable myself of a rigid
economy, I would commit implicitly to Marguerite the disposal of my
income, whom I knew to be every way qualified for the office. With
these reflections I nerved my mind to the most decisive adventures.

Why should I enter into a long detail of the incidents of this crisis?
Soon, though not immediately, I began to lose considerable sums. I
brought with me in the first instance a penetrating eye, a collected
mind, an intellect prepared for unintermitted exertion. Misfortune
subverted all this. My eye grew wild, my soul tempestuous, my thoughts
incoherent and distracted. I was incapable of any thing judicious;
but I was determined to persevere. I played till morning, nor could
the light of morning induce me to desist. The setting sun of that day
beheld me a beggar!

There is a degree of misery, which, as it admits of no description,
so does it leave no distinct traces in the memory. It seems as if
the weakness of the human mind alike incapacitated it to support the
delirium of joy, and the extremity of sorrow. Of what immediately
succeeded the period to which I have conducted my narrative I have
no recollection, but a horror beyond all names of horror, wild,
inexplicable, unintelligible. Let no one, however, imagine, that the
temporary desertion of the soul is any alleviation of its misery. The
mind that sinks under its suffering does not by that conduct shake
off its burden. Rather, ten thousand times rather, would I endure all
the calamities that have ever yet received a name, the sensations and
history of which are capable of being delineated, than sustain that
which has no words by which to express itself, and the conception of
which must be trusted solely to the faculties and sympathy of the
reader. Where is the cold and inapprehensive spirit that talks of
madness as a refuge from sorrow? Oh, dull and unconceiving beyond all
belief! I cannot speak of every species of madness; but I also have
been mad! This I know, that there is a vacancy of soul, where all
appears buried in stupidity, and scarcely deserves the name of thought,
that is more intolerable than the bitterest reflections. This I know,
that there is an incoherence, in which the mind seems to wander without
rudder and pilot, that laughs to scorn the superstitious fictions
of designing priests. Oh, how many sleepless days and weeks did I
endure! the thoughts frantic, the tongue raving! While we can still
adhere, if I may so express myself, to the method of misery, there
is a sort of nameless complacency that lurks under all that we can
endure. We are still conscious that we are men; we wonder at and admire
our powers of being miserable; but, when the masts and tackle of the
intellectual vessel are all swept away, then is the true sadness. We
have no consciousness to sustain us, no sentiment of dignity, no secret
admiration of what we are, still clinging to our hearts.

All this I venture to affirm, with the full recollection of what I
suffered, when restored to my senses, present to my mind.

When the account was closed, and the loss of my last stake had
finished the scene, I rose, and, quitting the fatal spot where these
transactions had passed, entered the street, with a heart oppressed,
and a bursting head. My eyes glared, but I saw nothing, and could think
of nothing. It was already nearly dark; and the day which had been
tempestuous, was succeeded by a heavy and settled rain. I wandered for
some time, not knowing whither I went. My pace, which had at first
been slow, gradually increased, and I traversed the whole city with
a hurried and impatient step. The streets which had contained few
persons at first, gradually lost those few. I was almost alone. I saw
occasionally ragged and houseless misery shrinking under the cover of a
miserable shed; I saw the midnight robber, watching for his prey, and
ready to start upon the unwary passenger. From me he fled; there was
something in my air that impelled even desperate violation to shrink
from the encounter. I continued this incessant, unmeaning exertion for
hours. At length, by an accidental glance of the eye, I found myself at
the gate of my own hotel. Heedless of what I did, I entered; and, as
nature was now completely exhausted within me, sunk down in a sort of
insensibility at the foot of the grand staircase.

This stupor, after a considerable interval, gradually subsided. I
opened my eyes, and saw various figures flitting about me; but I seemed
to myself equally incapable of collecting my thoughts, and of speech.
My understanding indeed shortly became clearer, but an insuperable
reluctance to voluntary exertion hung upon me. I explained myself only
in monosyllables; a sort of instinctive terror of disclosing what had
passed to the admirable woman I had sacrificed maintained in me this
perpetual reserve. For several days together I sat from morning till
night in one immovable posture, nor was any thing of force enough to
awaken me to exertion.




CHAPTER VII.


It was not long before the unhappy partner of my fortunes was informed
of what had passed. The wretches who had stripped me of my all soon
made their appearance to claim what was no longer mine. What would
have been their reception, if I had sufficiently possessed myself to
parley with them on the subject, I am unable to determine. I could
not have preserved the wreck of my property from their grasp, but at
the expense of an indelible stain upon my honour; yet my desperation
would probably have led me to a conduct equally extravagant and
useless. In the condition in which I was, the whole direction of the
business devolved upon Marguerite; and never did human creature demean
herself with greater magnanimity and propriety. She saw at once that
she could not resist their claims but at the expense of my reputation;
for herself she valued not riches, and had no dread of poverty; and,
thus circumstanced, she had the courage herself to bring to me the
papers they offered, the object of which I scarcely understood, and
to cause me to annex that signature which was to strip her and her
children of all earthly fortune. Her purpose was, as soon as this
business was over, to cause us to quit France, and retire into some
scene of virtuous obscurity. But she would not leave behind her for
the last descendants of the counts de St. Leon any avoidable disgrace.
Her mode of reasoning upon the subject was extremely simple. Obscurity
she regarded as no misfortune; and eminent situation, where it fairly
presented itself, as a responsibility it would be base to shrink from:
ignominy alone she considered as the proper theme of abhorrence. For
the fickleness and inconstancy of fortune it is impossible to answer;
by one of those reverses in which she appears to delight, she might yet
restore us to the lustre of our former condition; but, if the name of
St. Leon was henceforth to disappear from the annals of France, she was
desirous at least, as far as depended on her, that it should expire,
like the far famed bird of Arabia, in the midst of perfumes.

When the whole situation of Marguerite is taken into consideration,
the reader, like myself, will stand astonished at the fortitude of
her conduct. She had come to Paris, unable any longer to tranquillise
the agitation of her mind, and exhausted with fears, suspicions,
and alarms. When she arrived, she experienced indeed one delusive
moment of transport and joy. But that was soon over. It was succeeded
by reflections and conjectures respecting the mysteriousness of my
behaviour; it was succeeded by my unexpected departure, and the
hourly expectation of my return. After the lapse of a night and a
day, I returned indeed, but in what a condition! Drenched with rain,
trembling with inanition, speechless and alone. Scarcely had she
received notice of my arrival, and come forward to meet me, than she
saw me fall, motionless and insensible, at her feet. She watched my
recovery, and hung with indescribable expectation over my couch.
She was only called away by the wretches, who came to advance their
accursed claims, and to visit her with the intelligence of our ruin, as
with a thunderbolt. Already enfeebled and alarmed by all the preceding
circumstances, they spoke with no consideration to her weakness, they
stooped to no qualifications and palliatives, but disclosed the whole
in the most abrupt and shocking manner. Any other woman would have sunk
under this accumulation of ill. Marguerite only borrowed vigour from
her situation, and rose in proportion to the pressure of the calamity.
She took her resolution at once, and answered them in the most firm and
decisive language.

The period of inactivity and stupor that at first seized me was
succeeded by a period of frenzy. It was in this condition that
Marguerite conducted me and my children to an obscure retreat in
the canton of Soleure, in the republic of Switzerland. Cheapness
was the first object; for the most miserable pittance was all she
had saved from the wreck of our fortune. She had not chosen for
beauty of situation, or magnificence of prospects. The shock her
mind had sustained was not so great as to destroy her activity and
fortitude, but it left her little leisure for the wantonness of studied
indulgence. The scene was remote and somewhat sterile. She conceived
that, when I recovered my senses, an event which she did not cease to
promise herself, solitude would be most grateful, at least to the first
stage of my returning reason.

Hither then it was that she led me, our son, and three daughters.
Immediately upon our arrival she purchased a small and obscure, but
neat, cottage, and attired herself and her children in habits similar
to those of the neighbouring peasants. My paternal estates, as well as
those which had fallen to me by marriage, had all been swallowed up in
the gulf, which my accursed conduct had prepared. Marguerite made a
general sale of our moveables, our ornaments, and even our clothes.
A few books, guided by the attachment to literature which had always
attended me, were all that she saved from the wreck. A considerable
part of the sum thus produced was appropriated by my creditors.
Marguerite had the prudence and skill to satisfy them all, and was
contented to retain that only which remained when their demands were
discharged. This was the last dictate of her pride and the high-born
integrity of her nature, at the time that she thus departed a voluntary
exile from her native country. Two servants accompanied us in our
flight, whose attachment was so great, that even if their attendance
had not been necessary, it would have been found somewhat difficult
to shake them off. Marguerite, however, was governed by the strictest
principles of economy; and, whatever the struggle might have been with
the importunity of humble affection in dismissing these last remains
of our profuse and luxurious household, she would have thought herself
obliged to proceed even to this extreme, if judicious parsimony had
demanded it from her. But it did not. Our youngest daughter was at this
time only twelve months old, and it would have been scarcely possible
for the mother, however resolute in her exertions, to have discharged
the cares due to such a family, at a time when the father of it was
suffering under so heavy an affliction. One female servant she retained
to assist her in these offices. She could not dispense herself from a
very assiduous attention to me. She could never otherwise have been
satisfied, that every thing was done that ought to be done, that every
tenderness was exercised that might be demanded by my humiliating
situation, or that sufficient sagacity and skill were employed in
watching and encouraging the gleams of returning reason. The violence
of my paroxysms, however, was frequently such as to render a manual
force greater than hers necessary to prevent me from effecting some
desperate mischief. Bernardin, a trusty servant, nearly of my own age,
and who had attended upon my person almost from infancy, was retained
by Marguerite for this purpose. I was greatly indebted for the recovery
which speedily followed to the affectionate anxiety and enlightened
care of this incomparable woman. It is inconceivable to those who have
never been led to a practical examination of the subject, how much may
be effected in this respect by an attachment ever on the watch, and
an understanding judicious to combine, where hired attendance would
sleep, and the coarseness of a blunt insensibility would irritate, nay,
perhaps, mortally injure.

It is scarcely possible to imagine a wife more interesting and
admirable than Marguerite appeared upon the present occasion. Fallen
from the highest rank to the lowest poverty, she did not allow
herself a mean and pitiful regret. No reverse could be more complete
and abrupt, but she did not sink under it. She proved, in the most
convincing manner, that her elevation was not the offspring of wealth
or rank, but was properly her own. She gave a grace, even a lustre, to
poverty, which it can only receive from the emanations of a cultivated
mind. Her children were reconciled and encouraged by her example, and
soon forgot those indulgences which had not yet had time to emasculate
their spirits. The deplorable situation to which the father of the
family was reduced was far from inducing her to cease from her efforts
in the bitterness of despair. She determined for the present to be
both a father and a mother to her children. She looked forward with
confidence to my speedy recovery. Though I was the author of her
calamities, she did not permit this consideration to subtract from
the purity of her affection, or the tenderness of her anxiety. She
resolved that no word or look of hers should ever reproach me with my
misconduct. She had been accustomed to desire rank, and affluence, and
indulgence for her children; that her son might run the career of glory
which his forefathers ran, and that her daughters might unite their
fates with what was most illustrious and honourable in their native
country. But, if she were disappointed in this, she determined, as far
as it should be in her power, to give them virtue and cheerfulness and
content, a mind that should find resources within itself, and call
forth regard and esteem from the rest of mankind.

My recovery was fitful and precarious, sometimes appearing to be
rapidly on the advance, and at others to threaten a total relapse.
Among the expedients that Marguerite employed to re-excite the
slumbering spark of reason was that of paternal affection. Ever on
the watch for a favourable opportunity, she sometimes brought to me
her own little namesake, who, though only twelve months old, did not
fail to discover unequivocal marks of that playfulness and gaiety
which made so considerable a part of her constitutional character.
Her innocent smiles, her frolic and careless laughter, produced a
responsive vibration that reached to my inmost heart. They were, not
unfrequently, powerful enough to check the career of my fury, or to
raise me from the lowest pitch of despondence. Julia wept for me, and
Louisa endeavoured to copy the offices of kindness she was accustomed
to see her mother perform: Charles, who conceived more fully than the
rest the nature of my indisposition, was upon all occasions solicitous
to be admitted into my presence, and attended me for the most part
with speechless anxiety, while his watchful, glistening eye uttered
volumes, without the assistance of words. His mother at length yielded
to his importunity, and he became established the regular assistant of
Bernardin in the care of my person. The restlessness and impetuosity he
had hitherto manifested seemed upon this occasion entirely to subside:
hour after hour he willingly continued shut up in my chamber, eager for
every opportunity of usefulness, and gratified with that complaisance
with which the human mind never fails to be impressed, when it regards
its actions as beneficent, or approves its temper as compassionate.

The restoration of my health was greatly retarded by the melancholy
impressions which necessarily offered themselves to my mind when
recollection resumed her seat. It was fortunate for me that this sort
of retrospection appears not to be the first thing that occurs after
a paroxysm of insanity. When the tide of incoherent ideas subsides,
the soul is left in a state of exhaustion; and seems, by a sort of
instinct, to shun the influx of tumultuous emotions, and to dwell upon
such feelings as are mild, tranquil, and restorative. Once, however,
when I was nearly recovered, the thought of what I had been, and the
recollection of what I was, violently suggesting themselves to my mind,
brought on a relapse, attended with more alarming and discouraging
symptoms than my original alienation. At that moment Marguerite was,
for the first time, irresistibly struck with the conception that mine
was an incurable lunacy; and, as she afterwards assured me, at no
period down to that instant had she felt herself so truly inconsolable.
But even a sentiment of the last despair was incapable of superseding
the active beneficence of Marguerite. Her assiduities, so far as
related to this fatal calamity, were at length crowned with success.
Her gloomy prognostics were not realised, and the distemper of my
understanding quitted me for ever.

Wretched, however, as I have already remarked, beyond all common
notions of wretchedness, were my thoughts, when my soul returned to its
proper bias, and I fully surveyed the nature of my present situation.
Marguerite, who, by her sagacity and patience, had recovered me from
a state of the most dreadful disease, now exerted herself to effect
the more arduous task of reconciling me to myself. She assured me
that she forgave me from her inmost heart; nay, that she was thankful
to Providence, which, in the midst of what the world calls great
calamities, had preserved to her what she most valued, my affection,
entire. She contrasted what had been the subject of her apprehensions
before she came to Paris, with what had proved to be the state of the
case afterwards. She averred, that the worst that had happened was
trivial and tolerable, compared with the image that her fears had
delineated. She had feared to find my heart alienated from her, and
herself a widowed mother to orphan children. She dreaded lest I should
have proved myself worthless in her eyes, lest I should have been
found to have committed to oblivion the most sacred of all duties;
and, for the gratification of a low and contemptible caprice, to have
sacrificed all pretensions to honour and character. For that, indeed,
her heart would have bled; against that, all the pride she derived from
her ancestry and my own would have revolted; that would have produced
a revulsion of her frame, snapping the chain of all her habits, and
putting a violent close upon all the sentiments she had most fondly
nourished. She dreaded, indeed, that she should not have survived
it. But the mistake I had committed was of a very different nature.
I had neither forgotten that I was a husband nor a father; I had only
made an injudicious and unfortunate choice of the way of discharging
what was due to these characters. What had passed was incapable of
impeaching either the constancy of my affections or the integrity of
my principles. She forgave me, and it was incumbent upon me to forgive
myself.

She assured me that poverty, in her apprehension, was a very slight
evil; and she appealed to my own understanding for the soundness
of her judgment. She bid me look round upon the peasantry of the
neighbourhood, upon a footing with whom we were now placed, and ask my
own heart whether they were not happy. One disadvantage, indeed, they
were subjected to,--the absence of cultivation and learning. She could
never bring herself to believe that ignorance was a benefit; she saw
the contrary of this practically illustrated in her own case, in mine,
and in that of all the persons to whom, through life, she had been
most ardently attached. She wished her children to attain intellectual
refinement, possess fully the attributes of a rational nature, and to
be as far removed as possible from the condition of stocks and stones,
by accumulating a magazine of thoughts, and by a rich and cultivated
sensibility. But the want of fortune did not in our case, as in the
case of so many others, shut them out from this advantage: it was in
our own power to bestow it upon them.

It was the part of a reasonable man, she told me, not to waste his
strength in useless regrets for what was past, and had already eluded
his grasp; but to advert to the blessings he had still in possession.
If we did this in our present situation, we should find every reason
for contentment and joy. Our pleasure in each other, and the constancy
of our attachment, was unassailed and unimpaired. Where were there
two married persons, she would venture to ask, who had more reason to
applaud their connection, or to whom their connection was pregnant
with so various gratifications? From ourselves we had only to turn our
thoughts to our children; and we were surely as singularly fortunate
in this respect as in each other. Charles, who had always been the
subject of our pride, had lately exhibited such an example of patient
sympathy and filial affection, as perhaps had never been equalled in a
child so young. The sensibility of Julia, the understanding of Louisa,
and the vivacity of Marguerite, were all of them so many growing
sources of inexhaustible delight. Our children were intelligent,
affectionate, and virtuous. Thus circumstanced, she entreated me not
to indulge that jaundice of the imagination, which should create to
itself a sentiment of melancholy and discontent in the midst of this
terrestrial paradise.

Most virtuous of women, now perhaps the purest and the brightest
among the saints in heaven! why was I deaf to the soundness of your
exhortations, and the generosity of your sentiments? Deaf, indeed, I
was! A prey to the deepest dejection, they appeared to me the offspring
of misapprehension and paradox! Supposing, in the mean time, that they
were reasonable and just in the mouth of her who uttered them, I felt
them as totally foreign to my own situation. The language, as they
were, of innocence; it was not wonderful that to an innocent heart
they spoke tranquillity and peace. Marguerite looked round upon the
present rusticity and plainness of our condition, and every thing that
she saw talked to her of her merit and her worth. If we were reduced,
she was in no way accountable for that reduction; it had been the
test of her magnanimity, her patience, and the immutableness of her
virtue. She smiled at the assaults of adversity, and felt a merit in
her smiles. How different was my situation! Every thing that I saw
reminded me of my guilt, and upbraided me with crimes that it was
hell to recollect. My own garb, and that of my wife and children, the
desertion in which we lived, the simple benches, the unhewn rafters,
the naked walls, all told me what it was I had done, and were so many
echoes to my conscience, repeating, without intermission and without
end, its heart-breaking reproaches. Sleep was almost a stranger to me;
these incessant monitors confounded my senses in a degree scarcely
short of madness itself. It is the property of vice to convert every
thing that should be consolation into an additional source of anguish.
The beauty, the capacity, and the virtue of my children, the affection
with which they regarded me, the patience and attentiveness and
forbearance of their excellent mother, were all so many aggravations
of the mischief I had perpetrated. I could almost have wished to have
been the object of their taunts and execration. I could have wished to
have been disengaged from the dearest charities of our nature, and to
have borne the weight of my crimes alone. It would have been a relief
to me if my children had been covered with the most loathsome diseases,
deformed and monstrous. It would have been a relief to me, if they had
been abortive in understanding, and odious in propensities, if their
hearts had teemed with every vice, and every day had marked them the
predestined victims of infamy. The guilt of having stripped them of
every external advantage would then have sat light upon me. But thus
to have ruined the most lovely family perhaps that existed on the
face of the earth, the most exemplary of women, and children in whom
I distinctly marked the bud of every excellence and every virtue, was
a conduct that I could never forgive even to myself. Oh, Damville,
Damville! best of men! truest of friends! why didst thou put thy trust
in such a wretch as I am! Hadst thou no presentiment of the fatal
consequences? Wert thou empowered to commit thy only child and all her
possible offspring to so dreadful a risk? Indeed, it was not well done!
It was meant in kindness; but it was the cruellest mischief that could
have been inflicted on me. I was not a creature qualified for such dear
and tender connections. I was destined by nature to wander a solitary
outcast on the face of the earth. For that only, that fearful misery,
was I fitted. Why, misguided, misjudging man! didst thou not leave me
to my fate? Even that would have been less dreadful than what I have
experienced!--Wretch that I am! Why do I reproach my best benefactor?
No, let me turn the whole current of my invective upon myself! Damville
was actuated by the noblest and most generous sentiment that ever
entered the human mind. What a return then have I made, and to what a
benefit!

All the previous habits of my mind had taught me to feel my present
circumstances with the utmost acuteness. Marguerite, the generous
Marguerite, stood, with a soul almost indifferent, between the opposite
ideas of riches and poverty. Not so her husband. I had been formed,
by every accident of my life, to the love of splendour. High heroic
feats, and not the tranquillity of rural retirement, or the pursuits of
a character professedly literary, had been the food of my imagination,
ever since the faculty of imagination was unfolded in my mind. The
field of the cloth of gold, the siege and the battle of Pavia, were
for ever present to my recollection. Francis the First, Bayard, and
Bourbon, eternally formed the subject of my visions and reveries.
These propensities had indeed degenerated into an infantine taste for
magnificence and expense; but the roots did not embrace their soil the
less forcibly, because the branches were pressed down and diverted from
their genuine perpendicular. That from a lord, descended from some of
the most illustrious houses in France, and myself amply imbued with
the high and disdainful spirit incident to my rank, I should become a
peasant, was itself a sufficient degradation. But I call the heavens to
witness that I could have endured this with patience, if I had endured
it alone. I should have regarded it as the just retribution of my
follies, and submitted with the most exemplary resignation. But I could
not, with an equal mind, behold my wife and children involved in my
punishment. I turned my eyes upon the partner of my life, and recalled
with genuine anguish the magnificence to which she was accustomed,
and the hopes to which she was born. I looked upon my children, the
fruit of my loins, and once the pride of my heart, and recollected
that they were paupers, rustics, exiles. I could foresee no return
to rank, but for them and their posterity an interminable succession
of obscurity and meanness. A real parent can support the calamity of
personal degradation, but he cannot bear to witness and anticipate this
corruption of his blood. At some times I honoured Marguerite for her
equanimity. At others I almost despised her for this integrity of her
virtues. I accused her in my heart of being destitute of the spark of
true nobility. Her patience I considered as little less than meanness
and vulgarity of spirit. It would have become her better, I thought,
like me, to have cursed her fate, and the author of that fate; like me,
to have spurned indignant at the slavery to which we were condemned;
to have refused to be pacified; and to have wasted the last dregs of
existence in impatience and regret. I could act that which had involved
us in this dire reverse; but I could not encounter the consequences of
my act.

The state of my mind was in the utmost degree dejected and forlorn.
I carried an arrow in my heart, which the kindness of my wife and
children proved inadequate to extract, and the ranklings of which
time itself had not the power to assuage. The wound was not mortal;
but, like the wound of Philoctetes, poisoned with the blood of the
Lernean hydra, I dragged it about with me from year to year, and it
rendered my existence a galling burden hardly to be supported. A great
portion of my time was passed in a deep and mournful silence, which
all the soothings that were addressed to me could not prevail on me to
break. Not that in this silence there was the least particle of ill
humour or sullenness. It was a mild and passive situation of the mind;
affectionate, as far as it was any thing, to the persons around me; but
it was a species of disability; my soul had not force enough to give
motion to the organs of speech, or scarcely to raise a finger. My eye
only, and that only for a moment at a time, pleaded for forbearance and
pardon. I seemed like a man in that species of distemper, in which the
patient suffers a wasting of the bones, and at length presents to us
the shadow, without the powers, of a human body.

This was at some times my condition. But my stupor would at others
suddenly subside. Mechanically, and in a moment, as it were, I shook
off my supineness, and sought the mountains. The wildness of an
untamed and savage scene best accorded with the temper of my mind. I
sprung from cliff to cliff among the points of the rock. I rushed down
precipices that to my sobered sense appeared in a manner perpendicular,
and only preserved my life, with a sort of inborn and unelective care,
by catching at the roots and shrubs which occasionally broke the
steepness of the descent. I hung over the tops of rocks still more
fearful in their declivities, and courted the giddiness and whirl of
spirit which such spectacles are accustomed to produce. I could not
resolve to die: death had too many charms to suit the self-condemnation
that pursued me. I found a horrible satisfaction in determining to
live, and to avenge upon myself the guilt I had incurred. I was far
from imagining that the evils I had yet suffered were a mere sport and
ostentation of misery, compared with those that were in reserve for me.

The state of mind I am here describing was not madness, nor such as
could be mistaken for madness. I never forgot myself, and what I
was. I was never in that delirium of thought, in which the patient
is restless and active without knowing what it is that he does, and
from which, when roused, he suddenly starts, shakes off the dream
that engaged him, and stands astonished at himself. Mine was a rage,
guided and methodised by the discipline of despair. I burst into no
fits of raving; I attempted no injury to any one. Marguerite therefore
could not reconcile herself to the placing me under any restraint.
I frequently returned home, with my clothes smeared with the soil,
and torn by the briars. But my family soon became accustomed to
my returning in personal safety; and therefore, whatever was the
uneasiness my wife felt from my excursions, she preferred the enduring
it, to the idea of imposing on me any species of violence.

The state of my family presented a singular contrast with that of its
head. Marguerite was certainly not insensible to the opposition between
her former and her present mode of life; but she submitted to the
change with such an unaffected cheerfulness and composure, as might
have extorted admiration from malignity itself. She would perhaps have
dismissed from her thoughts all retrospect to our former grandeur, had
not the dejection and despair that seemed to have taken possession of
my mind forcibly and continually recalled it to her memory. For my
sufferings I am well assured she felt the truest sympathy; but there
was one consideration attending them that imperiously compelled her
to task her fortitude. They deprived me of the ability of in any
degree providing for and superintending my family; it became therefore
incumbent upon her to exert herself for the welfare of all. Had we
never fallen under this astonishing reverse, I might have spent my
whole life in daily intercourse with this admirable woman, without
becoming acquainted with half the treasures of her mind. She was my
steward; and from the result of her own reflections made the most
judicious disposition of my property. She was my physician; not by
administering medicines to my body, but by carefully studying and
exerting herself to remove the distemper of mind. Unfortunately no
distempers are so obstinate as mental ones; yet, had my distemper had
any lighter source than an upbraiding conscience, I am persuaded the
wisdom of Marguerite would have banished it. She was the instructor of
my children; her daughters felt no want of a governess; and I am even
ready to doubt whether the lessons of his mother did not amply supply
to Charles his loss of an education in the university of Paris. The
love of order, the activity, the industry, the cheerfulness of, let me
say, this illustrious matron, became contagious to all the inhabitants
of my roof. Once and again have I stolen a glance at them, or viewed
them from a distance busied, sometimes gravely, sometimes gaily, in
the plain, and have whispered to my bursting heart, “How miserable
am I! how happy they! So insurmountable is the barrier that divides
innocence from guilt. They may breathe the same air; they may dwell
under the same roof; they may be of one family and one blood; they may
associate with each other every day and every hour; but they can never
assimilate, never have any genuine contact. Is there a happier family
than mine in all the valley of this far-famed republic? Is there a
family more virtuous, or more cultivated with all the refinements that
conduce to the true dignity of man? I, I only am its burden and its
stain! The pleasure with which I am surrounded on every side finds a
repellent quality in my heart that will not suffer its approach. To
whatever is connected with me I communicate misfortune. Whenever I
make my appearance, those countenances that at all other times spoke
contentment and hilarity fall into sadness. Like a pestilential wind,
I appear to breathe blast to the fruits of nature, and sickliness to
its aspect.”

Marguerite expostulated with me in the most soothing manner upon the
obstinacy of my malady. “My Reginald! my love!” said she, “cease to be
unhappy, or to reproach yourself! You were rash in the experiment you
made upon the resources of your family. But have you done us mischief,
or have you conferred a benefit? I more than half incline to the latter
opinion. Let us at length dismiss artificial tastes, and idle and
visionary pursuits, that do not flow in a direct line from any of the
genuine principles of our nature! Here we are surrounded with sources
of happiness. Here we may live in true patriarchal simplicity. What is
chivalry, what are military prowess and glory? Believe me, they are the
passions of a mind depraved, that with ambitious refinement seeks to be
wise beyond the dictates of sentiment or reason! There is no happiness
so solid, or so perfect, as that which disdains these refinements. You,
like me, are fond of the luxuriant and romantic scenes of nature. Here
we are placed in the midst of them. How idle it would be, to wish to
change our arbours, our verdant lanes and thickets, for vaulted roofs,
and gloomy halls, and massy plate! Alas, Reginald! it is, I fear, too
true, that the splendour in which we lately lived has its basis in
oppression; and that the superfluities of the rich are a boon extorted
from the hunger and misery of the poor! Here we see a peasantry more
peaceful and less oppressed than perhaps any other tract of the earth
can exhibit. They are erect and independent, at once friendly and
fearless. Is not this a refreshing spectacle? I now begin practically
to perceive that the cultivators of the fields and the vineyards are
my brethren and my sisters; and my heart bounds with joy, as I feel
my relations to society multiply. How cumbrous is magnificence! The
moderate man is the only free. He who reduces all beneath him to a
state of servitude becomes himself the slave of his establishment, and
of all his domestics. To diminish the cases in which the assistance
of others is felt absolutely necessary is the only genuine road to
independence. We can now move wherever we please without waiting the
leisure of others. Our simple repasts require no tedious preparation,
and do not imprison us in saloons and eating rooms. Yet we partake
of them with a more genuine appetite, and rise from them more truly
refreshed, than from the most sumptuous feast. I prepare for my meal
by industry and exercise; and when it is over, amuse myself with my
children in the fields and the shade.--Though I love the sight of the
peasants, I would not be a peasant. I would have a larger stock of
ideas, and a wider field of activity. I love the sight of peasants
only for their accessories, or by comparison. They are comparatively
more secure than any other large masses of men, and the scenes in the
midst of which they are placed are delightful to sense. But I would
not sacrifice in prone oblivion the best characteristics of my nature.
I put in my claim for refinements and luxuries; but they are the
refinements and purifying of intellect, and the luxuries of uncostly,
simple taste. I would incite the whole world, if I knew how to do it,
to put in a similar claim. I would improve my mind; I would enlarge my
understanding; I would contribute to the instruction of all connected
with me, and to the mass of human knowledge. The pleasures I would
pursue and disseminate, though not dependent on a large property, are
such as could not be understood by the rustic and the savage.--Our
son, bred in these fields, indeed, will probably never become a
_preux chevalier_, or figure in the roll of military heroes; but he
may become something happier and better. He may improve his mind, and
cultivate his taste. He may be the counsellor and protector of his
sisters. He may be the ornament of the district in which he resides.
He may institute in his adoptive country new defences for liberty, new
systems of public benefit, and new improvements of life. There is no
character more admirable than the patriot-yeoman, who unites with the
utmost simplicity of garb and manners an understanding fraught with
information and sentiment and a heart burning with the love of mankind.
Such were Fabricius and Regulus among the ancients, and such was Tell,
the founder of the Helvetic liberty. For my part, I am inclined to be
thankful, that this unexpected reverse in our circumstances has made
me acquainted with new pleasures, and opened to my mind an invaluable
lesson. If you could but be prevailed on to enter into our pleasures,
to dismiss idle reproaches and pernicious propensities, our happiness
would then be complete.”

The expostulations of Marguerite often excited my attention, often my
respect, and sometimes produced a sort of imperfect conviction. But the
conviction was transient, and the feelings I have already described
as properly my own returned, when the fresh and vivid impression of
what I had heard was gone. It was in vain that I heard the praises of
simplicity and innocence. I was well pleased to see those who were
nearest to me not affecting contentment, but really contented with
these things. But I could not be contented for them. The lessons of
my education had left too deep an impression. I could myself have
surrendered my claim to admiration and homage, as a penance for my
misdeeds; but I could not figure to myself a genuine satisfaction
unaccompanied by these accessories: and this satisfaction I obstinately
and impatiently coveted for those I loved.




CHAPTER VIII.


While I murmured in bitterness of soul at the lowness to which my
family was reduced, a still heavier calamity impended, as if in
vengeance against the fantastic refinements of distress over which I
brooded.

I was wandering, as I had often done, with a gloomy and rebellious
spirit, among the rocks, a few miles distant from the place of
our habitation. It was the middle of summer. The weather had been
remarkably fine; but I disdained to allow the gratifications which
arise from a pure atmosphere and a serene sky to find entrance in
my soul. My excursions had for some days been incessant; and the
sun, which matured the corn and blackened the grapes around, had
imbrowned my visage, and boiled in my blood. I drank in fierceness and
desperation from the fervour of his beams. One night, as in sullen
mood I watched his setting from a point of the rock, I perceived the
clearness of the day subsiding in a threatening evening. The clouds
gathered in the west; and, as night approached, were overspread with a
deep dye of the fiercest crimson. The wind rose; and, during the hours
of darkness, its roarings were hollow and tempestuous.

In the morning the clouds were hurried rapidly along, and the air was
changed from a long series of sultriness to a nipping cold. This change
of the atmosphere I disregarded, and pursued my rambles. A little
before noon, however, the air suddenly grew so dark, as to produce a
sensation perfectly tremendous. I felt as if the darkest night had
never exceeded it. The impetuous motion to which I had been impelled,
partly by the fever in my blood, and partly by the turbulence of the
season, was suspended. Mechanically I looked round me for shelter.
But I could ill distinguish the objects that were near me, when a
flash of lightning, blue and sulphureous, came directly in my face,
with a brightness that threatened to extinguish the organ of vision.
The thunder that followed was of a length and loudness to admit of
no comparison from any object with which I am acquainted. The bursts
were so frequent as almost to confound themselves with each other. At
present I thought only of myself; and the recent habits of my mind
were not calculated to make me peculiarly accessible to fear. I stood
awe-struck; but rather with the awe that inheres to a cultivated
imagination, than that which consists in apprehension. I seemed ready
to mount amidst the clouds, and penetrate the veil with which nature
conceals her operations. I would have plunged into the recesses in
which the storm was engendered, and bared my bosom to the streaming
fire. Meanwhile my thoughts were solemnised and fixed by observing
the diversified dance of the lightnings upon the points of the rocks,
contrasting as they did in the strongest manner with the darkness in
which the rest of the scene was enveloped. This added contention of the
elements did not, however, suspend the raging of the wind. Presently a
storm of mingled hail and rain poured from the clouds, and was driven
with inconceivable impetuosity. The hailstones were of so astonishing
a magnitude, that, before I was aware, I was beaten by them to the
ground. Not daring to attempt to rise again, I simply endeavoured to
place myself in such a manner as might best protect me from their
violence. I therefore remained prostrate, listening to the force with
which they struck upon the earth, and feeling the rebound of their
blows from different parts of my body.

In about twenty minutes the shower abated, and in half an hour was
entirely over. When I began to move, I was surprised at the sensation
of soreness which I felt in every part of me. I raised myself upon
my elbow, and saw the hailstones, in some places lying in heaps like
hillocks of ice, while in others they had ploughed up the surface,
and buried themselves in the earth. As I looked further, I perceived
immense trees torn from their roots, and thrown to a great distance
upon the declivity. To the noise that they made in their descent, which
must have been astonishingly great, I had been at the time insensible.
Such were the marks which the tempest had left upon the mountains. In
the plain it was still worse. I could perceive the soil for long spaces
together converted into a morass, the standing corn beaten down and
buried in the mud, the vines torn into a thousand pieces, the fruit
trees demolished, and even in some places the animals themselves,
lambs, sheep, and cows, strewing the fields with their mangled
carcasses. The whole hopes of the year over which my eyes had glanced
a few minutes before, for it was near the period of harvest, were
converted into the most barren and dreary scene that any quarter of the
globe ever witnessed. I was mounted upon a considerable eminence, and
had an extensive prospect of this horrible devastation.

As I stood gazing in mute astonishment, suddenly a fear came over me
that struck dampness to my very heart. What was the situation of my
own family and their little remaining property, amidst this dreadful
ruin? I was in a position where, though I nearly faced our habitation,
a point of the rock intercepted it from my sight. The obstacle was but
a small one, yet it would require a considerable circuit to overcome. I
flew along the path with a speed that scarcely permitted me to breathe.
When I had passed the upper rock, the whole extensive scene opened upon
me in an instant. What were my sensations, when I perceived that the
devastation had been even more complete here than on the side where I
first viewed it! My own cottage in particular, which that very morning
had contained, and I hoped continued to contain, all that was most dear
to my heart, seemed to stand an entire solitude in the midst of an
immense swamp.

Marguerite, whose idea, upon our retreat into Switzerland, had been
that of conforming without reserve to the new situation that was
allotted us, had immediately expended the whole of what remained
from the shipwreck of our fortune, in the purchase of the cottage in
which we dwelt, and a small portion of land around it, sufficient
with economy for the support of our family. Under her direction the
hills had been covered with vines, and the fields with corn. She
had purchased cows to furnish us with milk, and sheep with their
fleeces, and had formed her establishment upon the model of the Swiss
peasantry in our neighbourhood. Reverting to the simplicity of nature,
appeared to her like building upon an immovable basis, which the clash
of nations could not destroy, and which was too humble to fear the
treachery of courts, or the caprice of artificial refinement.

It was all swept away in a moment. Our little property looked as if it
had been particularly a mark for the vengeance of Heaven, and was more
utterly destroyed than any of the surrounding scenes. There was not
a tree left standing; there was not a hedge or a limit that remained
within or around it; chaos had here resumed his empire, and avenged
himself of the extraordinary order and beauty it had lately displayed.

I was not overwhelmed with this astonishing spectacle. At that moment
nature found her way to my heart, and made a man of me. I made light
of these petty accessories of our existence; and the thought of my
wife and my children, simply as they were in themselves, filled every
avenue of my heart. For them, and them alone, I was interested: it was
a question for their lives. To conceive what they might personally
have sustained was a horror that seemed to freeze up all the arteries
of my heart. I descended from the mountain. It was with the greatest
difficulty, and not without many circuitous deviations, that I
proceeded; so much was the surface changed, and so deep and miry the
swamps. My terror increased, as I passed near to the carcasses of the
animals who had fallen victims to this convulsion of the elements. I
observed, with inconceivable alarm, that the dead or wounded bodies
of some human beings were intermingled with the brute destruction.
I stayed not to enquire whether they were yet in a state to require
assistance; the idea that had taken possession of me left no room for
the sentiment of general humanity.

A little further on I distinctly remarked the body of a woman at some
distance from any habitation, who appeared to be dead, destroyed by
the storm. Near her lay a female infant, apparently about six years of
age. My attention was involuntarily arrested; I thought of Louisa, that
sweet and amiable child, so like her admirable mother. The figure was
hers; the colour of the robe corresponded to that in which I last saw
her. The child was lying on her face. With all the impatient emotions
of a father, I stooped down. I turned over the body, that I might
identify my child. It was still warm; life had scarcely deserted it. I
gazed upon the visage; it was distorted with the agonies of death: but
enough to convince me still remained discernible; it was not Louisa!

I can scarcely recollect a period through all the strange vicissitudes
of my existence to be compared with this. If I had not felt what I then
felt, I could never have conceived it. Human nature is so constituted,
that the highest degree of anguish, an anguish in which the heart
stretches itself to take in the mightiness of its woe, can be felt but
for a few instants. When the calamity we feared is already arrived, or
when the expectation of it is so certain as to shut out hope, there
seems to be a principle within us by which we look with misanthropic
composure on the state to which we are reduced, and the heart sullenly
contracts and accommodates itself to what it most abhorred. Our hopes
wither; and our pride, our self-complacence, all that taught us to
rejoice in existence, wither along with them. But, when hope yet
struggles with despair, or when the calamity abruptly announces itself,
then is the true contention, the tempest and uproar of the soul too
vast to be endured.

This sentiment of ineffable wretchedness I experienced, when I stooped
down over the body of the imaginary Louisa, and when I hastened to
obtain the certainty which was of all things most terrible to me. The
termination of such a moment of horror is scarcely less memorable than
its intrinsic greatness. In an instant the soul recovers its balance,
and the thought is as if it has never been. I clapped my hands in an
ecstasy at once of joy and astonishment, so sure did I seem to have
made myself of my misfortune; I quitted the body with an unburdened
heart; I flew towards my home, that I might ascertain whether I was
prematurely speaking comfort to my spirit.

At length I reached it. I saw the happy group assembled at the door.
Marguerite had entertained the same terrors for me, with which I had
myself so lately been impressed. We flew into each other’s arms. She
hid her face in my neck, and sobbed audibly. I embraced each of the
children in turn, but Louisa with the most heartfelt delight. “Are you
safe, papa?”--“Are you safe, my child?” were echoed on every side. A
spectator, unacquainted with what was passing in our hearts, would
certainly have stood astonished to see the transport with which we
exulted, surrounded as we were with desolation and ruin.

After an interval, however, we opened our eyes, and began to ruminate
upon the new condition in which we were placed. Marguerite and myself
watched each other’s countenances with anxiety, to discover what were
likely to be the feelings of either in this terrible crisis. “Be of
good heart, my love,” said Marguerite; “do not suffer the accident
which has happened entirely to overcome you.” There was a mixed
compassion, tenderness, and anxiety in the tone of voice with which she
uttered these words, that was inexpressibly delightful.

“No, Marguerite,” replied I, with enthusiastic impetuosity, “I am not
cast down; I never shall be cast down again. Ruin is nothing to me,
so long as I am surrounded with you and our dear children. I have for
some time been a fool. In the midst of every real blessing, I have
fashioned for myself imaginary evils. But my eyes are now opened. How
easily is the human mind induced to forget those benefits with which
we are constantly surrounded, and our possession of which we regard as
secure! The feelings of this morning have awakened me. I am now cured
of my folly. I have learned to value my domestic blessings as I ought.
Having preserved them, I esteem myself to have lost nothing. What are
gold and jewels and precious utensils? Mere dross and dirt. The human
face and the human heart, reciprocations of kindness and love, and all
the nameless sympathies of our nature,--these are the only objects
worth being attached to. What are rank and station?--the homage of the
multitude and the applause of fools. Let me judge for myself! The value
of a man is in his intrinsic qualities; in that of which power cannot
strip him, and which adverse fortune cannot take away. That for which
he is indebted to circumstances, is mere trapping and tinsel. I should
love these precious and ingenuous creatures before me better, though
in rags, than the children of kings in all the pomp of ornament. I am
proud to be their father. Whatever may be my personal faults, the world
is my debtor for having been the occasion of their existence. But they
are endeared to me by a better principle than pride. I love them for
their qualities. He that loves, and is loved by, a race of pure and
virtuous creatures, and that lives continually in the midst of them, is
an idiot, if he does not think himself happy. Surrounded as I am now
surrounded, I feel as irremovable as the pillars of creation. Nothing
that does not strike at their existence can affect me with terror.”

Marguerite viewed me with surprise and joy. “Now indeed,” said she,
“you are the man I took you for, and the man I shall henceforth be
prouder than ever to call my husband. The sorrow in which you lately
indulged was a luxury; and we must have done with luxuries. You will be
our protector and our support.”

Thus saying, she took me by the hand, and motioned me to view with
her the devastation that had been committed. There was one path I had
discovered, in which we might proceed some way with tolerable ease.
The scene was terrible. We were indeed beggars. A whole province had
been destroyed: all the corn and the fruits of the earth; most of the
trees; in many places cattle; in some places men. Persons who had been
rich in the morning saw all the produce of their fields annihilated,
and were unable even to guess by what process fertility was to be
re-established. The comparatively wealthy scarcely knew how they were
to obtain immediate subsistence; the humbler class, who always live by
the expedients of the day, saw nothing before them but the prospect
of perishing with hunger. We witnessed, in one or two instances, the
anguish of their despair.

Our prospect was scarcely in any respect better than theirs; yet we
felt differently. We were more impressed with the joy of our personal
escape. As my error respecting the value of externals had been
uncommonly great, the sudden revolution of opinion I experienced was
equally memorable. The survey, indeed, that we took of the general
distress somewhat saddened our hearts; but the sadness it gave was that
of sobriety, not of dejection.

It was incumbent upon us to make a strict examination into the amount
of our property, and our immediate resources; and in this office I
united myself with Marguerite, not only with a degree of cheerfulness
and application, the perfect contrast of my whole conduct ever since
our arrival in Switzerland, but which greatly exceeded any thing I
had ever before exhibited in a business of this nature. We found
that, though all our hopes of a harvest were annihilated, yet we were
not destitute of the instant means of subsistence. The resources we
possessed, whether in money or provisions, that were our dependence
till the period when the new produce should supply their place, were
uninjured. Our implements of husbandry remained as before. The land was
not impoverished, but had rather derived additional fertility from the
effects of the storm. What we had lost was chiefly the produce of our
capital for one year, together with a part of that capital itself in
the live stock that had been destroyed. This was a loss which a certain
degree of care and scope in our external circumstances might easily
have enabled us to supply. But the principle of supply was denied us.
It was with considerable difficulty that all the economy of Marguerite
had enabled her to support our family establishment, while every thing
of this kind had gone on prosperously. Such a shock as the present we
were totally disqualified to surmount. It compelled us to a complete
revolution of our affairs.

Many indeed of our neighbours had scarcely any greater advantage
in their private affairs than ourselves. But they possessed one
superiority that proved of the greatest importance in this conjuncture;
they were natives of the state in which they resided. In the cantons
of Switzerland, the destruction of the fruits of the earth, occasioned
by inclement seasons and tempests, is by no means unfrequent; and it
is therefore customary, in plentiful years, to lay up corn in public
magazines, that the people may not perish in periods of scarcity.
These magazines are placed under the inspection and disposal of the
magistracy; and the inhabitants looked to them with confidence for the
supply of their need. No storm, however, had occurred in the memory of
man so terrible and ruinous as the present; and it became evident that
the magazines would prove a resource too feeble for the extent of the
emergency.

The storm had spread itself over a space of many leagues in
circumference, not only in the canton of Soleure, but in the
neighbouring cantons, particularly that of Berne. The sufferers, in our
own canton only, amounted to scarcely less than ten thousand. While the
women and children, for the most part, remained at home, the houses
having in general suffered little other damage than the destruction
of their windows, the fathers of families repaired to the seat of
government to put in their claims for national relief; and these alone
formed an immense troop, that threatened little less than to besiege
the public magazines and the magistrates. An accurate investigation was
entered into of the losses of each, it being the purpose of government,
as far as its power extended, not only to supply the people with the
means of immediate subsistence, but also, by disbursements from the
public treasury, to recruit the stock of cattle, and to assist every
one to return, with revived hopes and expectation, to the sphere of his
industry. The purpose was no doubt benevolent; but, in the mean time,
the unhappy victims found in uncertainty and expectation a real and
corroding anguish.

I advanced my claim with the rest, but met with a peremptory refusal.
The harsh and rigorous answer I received was, that they had not enough
for their own people, and could spare nothing to strangers. Upon this
occasion I was compelled to feel what it was to be an alien, and how
different the condition in which I was now placed from that I had
filled in my native country. There I had lived in the midst of a
people, to whom the veneration of my ancestry and name seemed a part
of their nature. They had witnessed for several years the respectable
manner in which I lived; the virtues of Marguerite were familiar to
them; and they took an interest in every thing that concerned us, a
sentiment that confessed us at once for kindred and patrons. It was
the turn of mind only which is generated by rank, that had compelled
us to quit their vicinity; we might have continued in it, if not
in affluence, at least enjoying the gratifications that arise from
general affection and respect. But here we were beheld with an eye
of jealousy and distaste. We had no prejudice of birth and habit
in our favour; indeed, in the reverse of fortune which had brought
us hither, Marguerite had been less desirous of obtruding, than of
withdrawing from the public eye, the circumstance of our rank. We
were too recent inmates to have secured, by any thing of a personal
nature, an advantageous opinion among our neighbours. They saw only
a miserable and distracted father of a family, and a mother who, in
spite of the simplicity she cultivated, sufficiently evinced that she
had been accustomed to a more elevated situation. The prepossessions
of mankind are clearly unfavourable to a new-comer, an emigrant who
has quitted his former connections and the scenes of his youth. They
are unavoidably impelled to believe, that his taking up his abode in
another country must be owing to a weak and discreditable caprice,
if it be not owing to something still more disadvantageous to his
character.

The calamity therefore which we had suffered in common with most of the
inhabitants of the province, finally reduced us to the necessity of
a second emigration. The jealousy with which we were regarded, daily
became more visible and threatening. Though, in consequence of the
distribution made by order of the state, the price of commodities was
not so much increased as might have been expected, we were considered
as interlopers upon the portion of the natives; the sellers could
with difficulty be persuaded to accommodate us, and the bystanders
treated us with murmurs and reviling. While we were deliberating what
course to pursue in this emergency, certain officers of government one
morning entered our habitation, producing an order of the senate for
our immediate removal out of the territory. It is of the essence of
coercive regulations, to expel, to imprison, and turn out of prison,
the individuals it is thought proper to control, without any care as
to the mischiefs they may suffer, and whether they perish under or
survive the evil inflicted on them. We were accordingly allowed only
from six in the morning till noon, to prepare for our departure. Our
guards indeed offered to permit me to remain three days to wind up
my affairs, upon condition that my wife and children were instantly
removed into another country, as a sort of hostages for my own
departure. This indulgence however would have been useless. In the
present state of the country no purchaser could be found for the little
estate I possessed; and if there could, it must doubtless have been
disposed of to great disadvantage at such an emergency. I know not
how we should have extricated ourselves out of these difficulties,
if a member of the senate, who, being one of my nearest neighbours,
had been struck with admiration of the virtues of Marguerite, and
with compassion for my family, had not paid me a visit shortly after
the arrival of the officers, and generously offered to take upon
himself the care of my property, and to advance me what money might
be necessary for my emigration. This offer, which at any other time
might have been regarded as purely a matter of course, under the
present circumstances, when capital was so necessary for the revival
of agriculture in the desolated country, implied a liberal and
disinterested spirit. I accepted the kindness of my neighbour in both
its parts, but for the reimbursement of his loan referred him to the
French minister to the United Cantons, who, under all the circumstances
of the case, and taking my estate as security for the money advanced, I
thought it reasonable to believe would attend to my application.




CHAPTER IX.


My affairs being thus far adjusted, I took leave of my late habitation,
and set off with my wife and children the same afternoon. In the
evening we arrived at Basle, where we were permitted to remain that
night; and the next morning were conducted in form out at the north
gate of the city, where our attendants quitted us, with a fresh
prohibition under the severest penalties, if we were found within
the ensuing twelve months in any of the territories of the Helvetic
republic.

Marguerite and myself had already formed our plan. We began with
dismissing both our servants. An attendant was no longer necessary
to me, nor a nurse for the infant. The suggestion of this measure
originated in myself. My temper at this time, as I have already said,
underwent a striking change. I was resolved to be happy; I was resolved
to be active. It was hard to part with persons so long familiar to
us, and who appeared rather in the character of humble friends than
domestics; but an imperious necessity demanded it. “Let us,” said I
to Marguerite, “increase and secure our happiness by diminishing our
wants. I will be your husbandman and your labourer; you may depend
upon my perseverance. My education has fitted me to endure hardship
and fatigue, though the hardships then thought of were of a different
nature. You have ever delighted in active usefulness; and will not, I
know, repine at this accumulation of employment. Let us accommodate
ourselves to our circumstances. Our children, I perceive, are fated to
be peasants, and will therefore be eminently benefited by the example
of patience and independence we shall set before them.”

The next object of our plan related to the choice of our future place
of residence. This originated with Marguerite. She had heard much
of the beauty and richness of the country bordering on the lake of
Constance, and she thought that, while we denied ourselves expensive
pleasures, or rather while they were placed out of our reach, there
would be a propriety in our procuring for ourselves a stock of those
pleasures which would cost us nothing. This was a refinement beyond
me, and serves to evince the superiority which Marguerite’s virtue and
force of mind still retained over mine. The virtue I had so recently
adopted was a strenuous effort. I rather resolved to be happy, than
could strictly be said to be happy. I loved my children indeed with an
unfeigned affection. It was with sincerity that I professed to prefer
them to all earthly possessions. But vanity and ostentation were habits
wrought into my soul, and might be said to form part of its essence.
I could not, but by the force of constant recollection, keep them out
of my wishes and hopes for the future. I could not, like Marguerite,
suffer my thoughts, as it were, to riot and wanton in the pleasures of
poverty. I could only reconcile myself to my fate by a sort of gloomy
firmness. The tranquillity I seemed to have attained, was an unnatural
state of my soul, to which it was necessary that I should resolutely
hold myself down, and from which my thoughts appeared ever upon the
alert to escape. Bitter experience had at length taught me a hard
lesson; and that lesson I was determined to practise, whatever pangs my
resignation might cost me.

We proceeded without hesitation in the direction we had resolved to
pursue. Our whole journey exceeded the space of forty leagues in
extent, and the expense necessarily attendant upon it (our family,
even after its reduction, consisting of no less than six persons),
drained our purse of a great part of the money which had been supplied
to us by the benevolent senator. But he had agreed to undertake the
disposing of the property we were obliged to leave behind us, and in
the mean time, if any considerable interval occurred before that was
accomplished, to furnish us with the sums that should be necessary for
our subsistence. We placed the utmost reliance upon his fidelity, and
dismissed from our minds all anxiety respecting the interval which our
banishment had interposed between us and the resources necessary for
our future settlement.

Upon our arrival at Constance, we found a letter from our friend; and
though he transmitted to us no fresh supply, the complexion of his
communication was upon the whole so encouraging, as to determine us,
with no other delay than that of four days’ rest from our journey,
to pass to the other side of the lake, and explore for ourselves a
situation suitable to our design. The western bank of the lake, with
the exception only of the city of Constance, was part of the _pays
conquis_ of the United Cantons; the eastern bank was a territory
dependent on the government of that city. It was in this territory that
we purposed fixing our residence; and we trusted, that our affairs
would shortly be put in a train to enable us to take possession of the
spot we should select.

Thus driven once more into flight by the pressure of misfortune, and
compelled to exchange for a land unknown the scenes which familiarity
might have endeared, or tender recollections have made interesting, we
did not sink under the weight of our adversity. This removal was not
like our last. Switzerland was to none of us endeared like the vales of
St. Leon. I was not now goaded and tormented by conscious guilt in the
degree I had then been; Marguerite was not afflicted by the spectacle
of my misery. Our present change, though it might be denominated a
fall, was light in comparison with the former. The composure I had
gained was new to me, and had to my own mind all the gloss of novelty.
To my companions it proved contagious; they were astonished at my
serenity, and drew from it an unwonted lightness of heart.

Thus circumstanced, our tour had its charms for us all; and there
are few passages of my life that I have felt more agreeably. The
lake itself is uncommonly beautiful, and its environs are fertile and
interesting. It is surrounded with an abundance of towns, villages,
country seats, and monasteries, sufficient to adorn and diversify the
view, but not to exclude the sweetness of a rural scenery, or the
grand features of nature. We coasted a considerable part of the lake,
that we might judge in some degree, previously to our landing, which
part of the shore promised best to yield us the object we sought. The
autumn was now commencing; the air was liquid and sweet; the foliage
was rich and varied; and the vine-covered hills exhibited a warmth and
luxuriance of colouring, that no other object of nature or art is able
to cope with. Surrounded with these objects, I sat in my boat in the
midst of my children; and, as I was but just awakened to an observation
of their worth and my own happiness, I viewed them with a transport
that would be ill illustrated by being compared with the transport of a
miser over his new-recovered treasure from the bowels of the deep.

O poverty! exclaimed I, with elevated and unconquerable emotion, if
these are the delights that attend thee, willingly will I resign the
pomp of palaces and the splendour of rank to whoever shall deem them
worth his acceptance! Henceforth I desire only to dedicate myself to
the simplicity of nature and the genuine sentiments of the heart. I
will enjoy the beauty of scenes cultivated by other hands than mine,
or that are spread out before me by the Author of the universe. I will
sit in the midst of my children, and revel in the luxury of domestic
affections; pleasures these, that may be incumbered, but cannot be
heightened, by all that wealth has in its power to bestow! Wealth
serves no other purpose than to deprave the soul, and adulterate the
fountains of genuine delight.

Such was the spirit of exultation with which my mind was at this time
filled. I am sensible that it was only calculated to be transitory.
I might learn to be contented; I was not formed to be satisfied in
obscurity and a low estate.

Thus happy, and thus amused, we spent two days in coasting the lake,
landing frequently for the purposes either of variety or enquiry, and
regularly passing the night on shore. On the evening of the second day
we were struck with the neat appearance and pleasing situation of a
cottage, which we discovered in our rambles, about a mile and a half
from the lake. We found that it was to be sold, and it seemed precisely
to correspond with the wishes we had formed. It was at a considerable
distance from any populous neighbourhood, the nearest town being that
of Merspurg, the usual residence of the bishops of Constance, which was
distant from this spot not less than three leagues.

The cottage was situated in a valley; the hills being for the most
part crowned with rich and verdant foliage, their sides covered with
vineyards and corn, and a clear transparent rivulet murmuring along
from east to west. In the distance a few similar cottages discovered
themselves, and in front there was an opening between the hills, just
wide enough to show us a few sails as they floated along the now even
surface of the lake. We approached the cottage, and found in it only
one person, an interesting girl of nineteen, who had resided there from
her birth, and had been employed for the last four years in attendance
upon the closing scene of her mother. Her mother had been dead only a
few weeks, and she was upon the point of removing, as she told us, to
the house of a brother, the best creature in the world, who was already
married, and had a family of children. While we were talking with her,
we perceived a fine boy of about eleven years of age skipping along the
meadow. He proved to be her nephew, and hastened to say that his father
and Mr. Henry were just behind, and would be with her in a few minutes.
We waited their arrival; and it was easy to see that Mr. Henry was by
no means an indifferent object in the eyes of the beautiful orphan: she
had probably conditioned that he should permit her to remain single as
long as she could be of any use to her mother. The lovers were well
satisfied that the girl’s brother should be taken aside, that I might
talk over with him the affair of the cottage. We made a tour of the
fields that were part of the property of the deceased, and the terms of
our intended purchase were easily adjusted.

Though we had now accomplished the immediate purpose of our
expedition, yet, as we had found unusual exhilaration and sweetness in
the objects it presented to us, we came to a resolution of continuing
it still further, and completing the circuit of the lake. We were aware
that it would be vain as yet to expect to receive the money requisite
for completing our purchase; and as no pleasure, merely in the way of
relaxation, could be more delightful than that we were now enjoying,
so was it impossible that we could fill up our time in a more frugal
manner than in this little voyage. Our gratification was not less, but
more perfect, because it consisted of simple, inartificial, unbought
amusements. The scenes around us were refreshing and invigorating; they
were calculated, temporarily at least, to inspire gaiety and youth into
decrepitude itself. Amidst these scenes we forgot our sorrows; they
were a kind of stream, in which weariness and dejection plunged their
limbs, and came forth untired and alert. They awakened in the mind all
its most pleasing associations. Having already, as we believed, chosen
the place of our future residence, we busied ourselves in imagining
all the accompaniments that would grow out of it. We determined that
poverty with health would not fail to be attended with its portion of
pleasures. The scenes of nature were all our own; nor could wealth
give them a more perfect, or a firmer, appropriation. The affections
and charities of habitude and consanguinity we trusted we should feel
uninterrupted; unincumbered with the ceremonies and trappings of life,
and in that rural plainness which is their genial soil.

After a leisurely and delightful voyage of six days, we returned
to Constance. We expected to have found on our return some further
intelligence from the beneficent senator, but in this we were
disappointed. The imagination however easily suggested to us a
variety of circumstances that might have delayed the business he had
undertaken; and it was no forced inference to suppose that he deferred
writing, because he had nothing important to communicate. At first
therefore we suffered little uneasiness from the delay; but as time
proceeded, and the silence of our protector continued, the affair began
to assume a more serious aspect. The little stock we had brought
with us in our exile was in a rapid progress of decay. We had managed
it with frugality; though not at first with that anxious solicitude,
the necessity of which we now began to apprehend. We had procured for
ourselves two small and inconvenient apartments in an obscure alley
of the city of Constance. We were in the act of meditating what steps
it would be necessary to take in this unfortunate emergency, when
intelligence was brought us of the sudden decease of the person upon
whose kindness and exertions we depended.

He was succeeded in his estate by his nephew, a man of whom we had
heard something during our residence in the neighbourhood, and
whose habits we understood to be diametrically the reverse of his
predecessor’s. In short, he had been represented to us as illiberal,
morose, selfish, and litigious; a man who, having suffered in one part
of his life the hardships of poverty, scrupled no means, honourable or
otherwise, of removing it to the greatest practicable distance. He had
already reaped the succession some weeks, when we heard of the event
that put him in possession of it; and the letters which I had more than
once addressed to our protector had probably fallen into his hands.
These circumstances afforded no favourable augury of the treatment
we might expect from him. The first thing which seemed proper was to
write to him, which I accordingly did. I acquainted him with the nature
of the transaction between myself and his uncle, and signified how
necessary it was that we should come to a conclusion as speedily as
possible. I represented to him pathetically the condition to which I
was born, and the opulence in which I had passed many years of my life,
together with the contrast afforded by the present reduced and urgent
circumstances of my family. I entreated him to exert his generosity and
justice in behalf of an unfortunate exile, whom untoward events had
deprived of the power of doing justice to himself.

To this letter I received no answer. Uncertain as to the cause of my
correspondent’s silence, or even whether my letter had been received,
I wrote again. My heart was wrung with this new adversity. I was
forbidden, under pain of perpetual imprisonment, to return to the
territories of the republic, and I had no friend to solicit in my
behalf. In Constance I was utterly a stranger. In Switzerland, my
unfortunate habits of life, the depression and solitude in which I had
been merged, deprived me of the opportunity of forming connections. The
deceased was the only person who had been disposed to interfere for me.
It was too probable that the silence of his successor was an indication
of the hostility of his views. I saw nothing before me but the prospect
of my family perishing with want, deprived of their last resource,
exiles and pennyless. Thus destitute and forlorn, what could we do? to
what plan could we have recourse? We had not so much as the means of
providing ourselves with the implements of the humblest labour. If we
had, could I, under my circumstances, resolve upon this? Could I give
up the last slender pittance of my children while there was a chance of
recovering it; and, by surrendering them to the slavery of perpetual
labour, devote them to the lowest degree of ignorance and degradation?
No; I still clung to this final hope, and was resolved to undertake
any thing, however desperate, rather than part with it. Such were my
feelings; and, in the new letter which I now despatched, I poured out
all the anguish of my soul.

A reply to this letter was at length vouchsafed. The heir of my
protector informed me, that he knew nothing of the business to which
I alluded; that he had come into possession of the lands I described,
together with the other property of his late uncle, and regarded
himself as holding them by the same tenure; that he found in the
accounts of the estate a sum of money advanced to me, which he might
with the strictest justice regard as a debt, and pursue me for it
accordingly. He should be liberal enough however so far to give credit
to my story, and to consider the sum in question as advanced upon a
pledge of land: in that case, I might regard myself as sufficiently
fortunate in having obtained even that amount at a time when, but for
the humanity or weakness of his uncle, my estate would not have sold
for a farthing. Meanwhile, the forbearance which he proffered would,
he observed, depend upon my conduct, and be retracted if I afforded
him cause for resentment. He added, that he despised my menaces and
commands, and that, if I took a single step against him, I should find
it terminate in my utter ruin.

Nothing could be more profligate than the style of his letter. But
its impotence was equal to its wickedness. It was absurd to threaten
to inflict ruin on a man whom ruin had already overtaken. Before the
letter arrived, I had disbursed the whole sum I brought with me from
Switzerland. This entire annihilation of my resources seemed to steal
on me unperceived. Finding that all reply to my importunity was either
refused, or deferred to an uncertain period, I would willingly at
all risks have sought the villain who thus obdurately devoted me and
my family to destruction, and have endeavoured to obtain justice in
person. But it was now too late. Before I felt the case thus desperate,
my finances were so far reduced as to make it impracticable for me to
leave my wife and children enough to support them in my absence, even
if I had determined myself to set out upon this perilous expedition
pennyless. I resolved that, if we did perish, we would perish together.

Penury was now advancing upon us with such rapid strides, that the
lowest and most scanty resources no longer admitted of neglect. Had
a case thus desperate been encountered with timely attention, it is
not improbable that some of the various talents I had acquired in
the course of my education would have furnished me with a means of
subsistence not altogether plebeian or incompetent. But, with the
uncertainty of my situation, and totally unaccustomed as I was to
regard my person or mind as a machine fitted for productive labour, I
had not looked to this question, till the urgency of the case deprived
me of every advantage I might otherwise have seized. I was glad
therefore to have recourse to menial occupation, and sought employment
under the gardener of the episcopal palace, for whose service I was
sufficiently qualified by my ten years’ retreat in the Bordelois. That
I might better adapt myself to the painful necessity of my situation, I
previously exchanged some of my own clothes for garments more suitable
to the business I now solicited. It was not till I had arrived within
a very few days to the end of my resources; that even this expedient,
by a sort of accident, recurred to my mind. Marguerite, though fully
aware of the urgency of the case, had, as she afterwards told me,
imposed on herself a compulsory silence, fearing for the inflamed and
irritated frame of my mind, and aware that the course of events would
ultimately lead me to a point with which she dreaded to intermeddle.
This was for her a trying moment; my lately recovered insanity obliging
her to contemplate in silence our growing distress, and to wait the
attack of hunger and want that threatened to destroy us, with an
apparent tranquillity and cheerfulness.

For me, so entire a revolution had taken place in my sentiments, that
I spurned with contempt, so far as related to myself, that pride of
rank and romantic gallantry of honour, which had formerly been my
idols. I submitted with a sort of gloomy contentment to the situation
upon which my destiny drove me. I regarded it as the natural result of
my former misconduct; and derived a sentiment of ease and relief from
thus expiating, as it were, with the sweat of my brow, the temptations
to which I had yielded. Had I been myself only reduced thus low, or
had the produce of my labour been sufficient to purchase competence
for my wife and the means of instruction for my family, I can safely
affirm that I should have found no consequence so direct from my own
degradation as the means of silencing the reproaches of conscience and
reconciling me to myself. But when I returned in the evening with the
earnings of my day’s labour, and found it incompetent to the procuring
for those who depended on me the simplest means of subsistence, then
indeed my sensations were different. My heart died within me. I did
not return after the fatigues of the day, which, to me who had not
been accustomed to unremitted labour, and who now began to feel that I
was not so young as I had been at the siege of Pavia, were extremely
trying,--I did not return, I say, to a night of repose. I became
a very woman when I looked forward, and endeavoured to picture to
myself the future situation of my family. I watered my pillow with
my tears. Often, when I imagined that my whole family were asleep, I
gave vent to my perturbated and distracted mind in groans: Marguerite
would sometimes overhear me; and with the gentlest suggestions of her
admirable mind would endeavour to soothe my thoughts to peace. For the
present, as I have said, my earnings were incompetent, and we found it
necessary to supply the deficiency by the sale of the few garments,
not in immediate use, that we still possessed. What then would be the
case when these were gone, and when, in addition to this, it would be
necessary to purchase not only food to eat, and a roof to shelter, but
also clothes to cover us?




CHAPTER X.


These deficiencies I anxiously anticipated; but there was another
evil, upon which I had not calculated, that was still nearer and more
overwhelming. The mode of life in which I was now engaged, so different
from any thing to which I had been accustomed, excessive fatigue,
together with the occasional heat of the weather, the uneasiness of my
mind, and the sleeplessness of my nights, all combined to throw me into
a fever, which, though it did not last long, had raged so furiously
during the period of its continuance, as to leave me in a state of the
most complete debility. While the disorder was upon me, I was sensible
of my danger; and, as the brilliant and consolatory prospects of life
seemed for ever closed upon me, I at first regarded my approaching
dissolution with complacency, and longed to be released from a series
of woes, in which I had been originally involved by my own folly.
This frame of mind however was of no great duration; the more nearly
I contemplated the idea of separation from those I loved, the smaller
was my resignation. I was unwilling to quit those dear objects by
which I still held to this mortal scene; I shrunk with aversion from
that barrier which separates us from all that is new, mysterious, and
strange. Another train of ideas succeeded this, and I began to despise
myself for my impatience and cowardice. It was by my vices that my
family was involved in a long train of misfortunes; could I shrink
from partaking what I had not feared to create? The greater were the
adversities for which they were reserved, the more ought I to desire to
suffer with them. I had already committed the evil; in what remained,
it was reasonable to suppose I should prove their benefactor and not
their foe. It was incumbent on me to soothe and to animate them, to
enrich their minds with cheerfulness and courage, and to set before
them an example of philosophy and patience. By my faculties of industry
I was their principal hope; and, whatever we might suffer combined, it
was probable their sufferings would be infinitely greater, if deprived
of my assistance. These reflections gave me energy; and it seemed as if
the resolute predilection I had conceived for life contributed much to
my recovery.

One thing which strongly confirmed the change my mind underwent in
this respect, was a conversation that I overheard at a time when I was
supposed to be completely in a state of insensibility, but when, though
I was too much reduced to give almost any tokens of life, my faculties
of hearing and understanding what passed around me were entire. Charles
came up to my bedside, laid his hand upon mine as if to feel the state
of the skin, and, with a handkerchief that was near, wiped away the
moisture that bedewed my face. He had been fitted for many nurse-like
offices by the unwearied attention he had exerted towards me in the
paroxysm of my insanity. Having finished his task, he withdrew from the
bed, and burst into tears. His mother came up to him, drew him to the
furthest part of the room, and in a low voice began the conversation.

“Do, my dear boy, go down stairs, and get yourself something to eat.
You see, your papa is quiet now.”

“I am afraid that will not last long; and then he will be so restless,
and toss about so, it is dreadful to see him.”

“I will watch, Charles, and let you know.”

“Indeed, mamma, I cannot eat now. I will by and by.”

“You must try to eat, Charles, or else you will make yourself quite
ill. If you were ill too, it would be more than I could support.”

“I will not be ill, mamma. I assure you I will not. But, besides that I
have no stomach, I cannot bear to eat when there is hardly enough for
my sisters.”

“Eat, boy. Do not trouble yourself about that. We shall get more when
that is gone. God is good, and will take care of us.”

“I know that God is good; but for all that, one must not expect to
have every thing one wishes. Though God is good, there are dreadful
misfortunes in the world, and I suppose we shall have our share of
them.”

“Come, Charles, though you are but a boy, you are the best boy in the
world. You are now almost my only comfort; but you will not be able to
comfort me if you do not take care of yourself.”

“Dear mamma!--Do you know, mamma, I heard that naughty man below stairs
count up last night how much rent you owed him for, and swear you
should not stay any longer if you did not pay him. If I were a little
bigger, I would talk to him so that he should not dare to insult us
in our distress. But, not being big enough, I opened the door, and
went into the room, and begged him for God’s sake not to add to your
distress. And, though he is so ugly, I took hold of his hand, and
kissed it. But it felt like iron, which put me in mind of his iron
heart, and I cried ready to burst with mortification. He did not say
hardly a word.”

“He must be paid, Charles: he shall be paid.”

“Do you know, mamma, as soon as I left him I went to the bishop’s
gardens, and spoke to the gardener? I asked him, if he had heard that
my papa was ill, and he said he had. He said, too, he was very sorry,
and wanted to know what hand we made of it for want of the wages. I
told him, we were sadly off, and the man of the house had just been
affronting me about his rent. But, said I, cannot you give me something
to do, to weed or to rake? I can dig a little too, and scatter seed. He
asked, if I knew weeds from flowers. Oh, that I do! said I. Well then,
said he, there is not much you can do; but you are a good boy, and I
will put you on the bishop’s list. But now, mamma, I have not the heart
to work, till I see whether papa will get well again.”

While poor Charles told his artless tale, Marguerite wept over him, and
kissed him again and again. She called him the best child in the world,
and said that, if I were but so fortunate as to recover, with such a
husband and such a son, she should yet be the happiest of women.

“Oh, my poor father!” exclaimed Charles. “Ever since the great
hail-storm, I have every hour loved him better than before. I thought
that was impossible, but he is so gentle, so kind, so good-humoured,
and so patient! I loved him when he was harsh, and when he was out of
his mind; but nothing so well then as I have done since. People that
are kind and smile always do one good; but nobody’s smiles are like my
father’s. It makes me cry with joy sometimes, when I do but think of
them. Pray, papa,” added he, coming up to the bedside, and whispering,
yet with a hurried and passionate accent, “get well! Do but get well,
and we will be so happy! Never was there a family so happy or so loving
as we will be!”

While he spoke thus, I endeavoured to put out my hand, but I could
not; I endeavoured to smile, but I was unable: my heart was in a
feeble, yet soothing, tranquillity. The accents of love I had heard,
dwelt upon my memory. They had talked of distress, but the sentiment
of love was uppermost in my recollection. I was too weak of frame to
suffer intellectual distress; no accents but those which carried balm
to my spirit, seemed capable of resting upon my ear. From this hour
I regularly grew better, and, as I recovered, seemed to feel more
and more vividly how enviable it was to be the head of a loving and
harmonious family.

My recovery however was exceedingly slow, and it was several weeks
before I had so far recruited my strength as to be capable of my
ordinary occupations. In the mean time the pecuniary difficulties
to which we were exposed hourly increased, and the cheerful but
insignificant labours of Charles could contribute little to the support
of a family. The melancholy nature of our situation might perhaps
have been expected to prevent the restoration of my health. At first
however it had not that effect. The debilitated state of my animal
functions led me, by a sort of irresistible instinct, to reject ideas
and reflections which I should then have been unable to endure. I saw
the anxiety and affection of my family, and I was comforted. I saw
the smiles of Marguerite, and I seemed insensible to the languor, the
saddened cheerfulness, they expressed. I did not perceive that, while I
was provided with every thing necessary in my condition, my family were
in want of the very bread that should sustain existence.

My health in the mean time improved, and my perceptions became
proportionably clearer. Symptoms of desolation and famine, though as
much as possible covered from my sight, obtruded themselves, and were
remarked. One day in particular I observed various tokens of this
nature in silence, and with that sort of bewildered understanding which
at once labours for comprehension and resists belief. The day closed;
and what I had perceived pressed upon my mind, and excluded sleep. Now
for the first time I exerted myself to recollect in a methodical way
the state of my affairs; for the severity of my illness had at length
succeeded to banish from me all ideas and feelings but what related to
the sensations it produced, and to the objects around me; and it was
not without effort that I could once more fully call to mind the scenes
in which I had been engaged. The truth then by regular degrees rose
completely to view; and I began to be astonished, that my poor wife
and children had been able in any manner to get through the horrible
evils to which they must have been exposed. This thought I revolved in
my mind for near two hours; and the longer I dwelt upon it, the more
perturbed and restless I grew. At length it became impossible for me to
hold my contemplations pent up in my own bosom. I turned to Marguerite,
and asked her, whether she were asleep.

She answered in the negative: she had been remarking my restlessness,
and tenderly enquired respecting its cause.

“How long,” said I, “is it since I was taken with the fever?”

“A month to-morrow,” replied she. “It was of the most malignant and
distressing kind while it lasted, and I did not expect you to live.
But it has left you a fortnight; and I hope, Reginald, you find
yourself getting strong again.”

“And so we are here in Constance, and we have left Switzerland----?”

“Three months, my love!”

“I remember very well the letter we received from monsieur Grimseld;
has any further intelligence reached us from that quarter?”

“None.”

“None! No supply of any kind has reached you?”

“My dear Reginald, talk of something else! You will soon, I hope,
be well: our children are all alive; and the calamity, that has not
succeeded to separate us, or to diminish our circle of love even by a
single member, we will learn to bear. Let us fix our attention on the
better prospects that open before us!”

“Stay, Marguerite! I have other questions to ask. Before you require
me to bear the calamities that have overtaken us, let me understand
what these calamities are. While we waited for intelligence from
Switzerland, we expended the whole sum that we brought with us, and I
was obliged to hire myself to the episcopal gardener for bread; was it
not so?”

“Indeed, Reginald, you are to blame! Pray question me no further!”

“This was our condition some time ago; and now, for a month past, I
have been incapable of labour. Marguerite, what have you done?”

“Indeed, my love, I have been too anxious for you, to think much of
any thing else. We had still some things, you know, that we could
contrive to do without; and those I have sold. Charles too, our
excellent-hearted son, has lately hired himself to the gardener, and
has every night brought us home a little, though it was but little.”

“Dear boy! What children, what a wife, have I brought to destruction!
Our rent too, surely you have not been able to pay that?”

“Not entirely. In part I have been obliged to pay it.”

“Ah! I well remember how flinty-hearted a wretch has got the power over
us in that respect!”

“He has not turned us out of doors. He threatened hard several times.
At last I saw it was necessary to make an effort, and the day before
yesterday I paid him half his demand. If I could have avoided that, we
might have had a supply of food a little longer. I intreated earnestly
for a little further indulgence, but it was in vain. It went against
the pride and independence of my soul to sue to this man; but it was
for you and for my children!”

“Remorseless wretch! Then every petty resource we had is gone?”

“Indeed I do not know that we have any thing more to sell. I searched
narrowly yesterday; but I will examine again to-day. The poor children
must have something to support them, and their fare has of late been
dreadfully scanty.”

“Their fare! What have they eaten?”

“Bread; nothing else for the last fortnight!”

“And yourself?”

“Oh, Reginald! it was necessary, you know, that I should keep myself
alive. But, I assure you, I have robbed them as little as I could.”

“Horror, horror! Marguerite, what is it you dream of? I see my wife and
children dying of hunger, and you talk to me of hope and of prospects!
Why has this detail of miseries been concealed from me? Why have I been
suffered, with accursed and unnatural appetite, to feed on the vitals
of all I love?”

“Reginald! even selfishness itself would have taught us that! It is to
your recovery that we look for our future support!”

“Mock me not, I adjure you, with senseless words! You talk idly of
the future, while the tremendous present bars all prospect to that
future. We are perishing by inches. We have no provision for the coming
day! No, no; something desperate, something yet unthought of, must be
attempted! I will not sit inactive, and see my offspring around me die
in succession. No, by Heaven! Though I am starving like Ugolino, I am
not, like Ugolino, shut up in a dungeon! The world is open; its scenes
are wide; the resources it offers are, to the bold and despairing,
innumerable! I am a father, and will show myself worthy of the name!”

“Reginald! torture me not by language like this! Think what it is to
be indeed a father, and make yourself that! Be careful of yourself;
complete your recovery,--and leave the rest to me! I have conducted it
thus far, nor am I yet without hope. Eight days ago I applied to the
secretary of the palace, representing your case as a retainer of the
bishop, disabled by sickness, and with a family unprovided for. Till
yesterday I got no answer to my memorial; and then he informed me, that
you had been so short a time in employ, that nothing could be done for
you. But to-day I will throw myself at the feet of the bishop himself,
who arrived last night only from the other side of the lake.”

Every word that Marguerite uttered went to my heart. It was not long
before the dawn of the day, and the truths I had heard were further
confirmed to me by the organ of sight. The sentiments of this night
produced a total revolution in me, and I was no longer the feeble
convalescent that the setting sun of the preceding day had left me. The
film was removed from my eyes, and I surveyed not the objects around
me with a glassy eye and unapprehensive observation. All the powers
I possessed were alert and in motion. To my suspicious and hurried
gaze the apartment appeared stripped of its moveables, and left naked,
a mansion in which for despair to take up his abode. My children
approached me; I seemed to read the wan and emaciated traces of death
in their countenances. This perhaps was in some degree the painting
of my too conscious thoughts. But there needed no exaggeration to
awaken torture in my bosom, when, thus stimulated, I observed for the
first time the dreadful change that had taken place in Marguerite. Her
colour was gone; her cheeks were sunk; her eye had the quickness and
discomposure expressive of debility. I took hold of her hand, and found
it cold, emaciated, and white. I pressed it to my lips with agony; a
tear unbidden fell from my eye, and rested upon it. Having finished
my examination, I took my hat, and was hastening to escape into the
street. Marguerite noted my motions, and anxiously interposed to
prevent my design. She laid her hand on my arm gently, yet in a manner
full of irresistible expostulation.

“Where would you go? What have you purposed? Do not,--Oh, do not,
destroy a family, to whom your life, your sobriety, and prudence, are
indispensable!”

I took her hand within both mine. “Compose yourself, my love! I have
been your enemy too much already, to be capable now, so much as in
thought, of adding to my guilt! I need an interval for musing and
determination. I will return in a very short time, and you shall be the
confidant of my thoughts!”

With wild and impatient spirit I repassed in idea the whole history
of my life. But principally I dwelt in recollection upon the marquis
de Damville, that generous friend, that munificent benefactor, whose
confidence I had so ill repaid. “Damville!” exclaimed I, “you trusted
to me your daughter, the dearest thing you knew on earth; you believed
that the wretch did not live who could be unjust to so rich a pledge.
Look down, look down, O best of men! from the heaven to which your
virtues have raised you, and see of how much baseness man--yes, the
man you disdained not to call your friend--is capable! But, no! a
sight like this might well convert the heaven you dwell in to hell!
You trusted her to me; I have robbed her! You enriched her mind with
the noblest endowments; I have buried them in the mire of the vilest
condition! All her generous, her unwearied exertions are fruitless; by
my evil genius they are blasted! I have made her a mother, only that
she might behold her children perishing with hunger! They stretch out
their hands to me for the smallest portion of that inheritance, which
I have squandered in more than demoniac vice! This, this is the fruit
of my misdeeds! I am now draining the last dregs of that mischief, of
which I have so wickedly, so basely, been the author!”

As I returned I met Marguerite, who was come from her attempt upon the
bishop. He had received her paper, and delivered it to his secretary,
that very secretary who had already disappointed all her expectations
from that quarter. She had attempted to speak, to adjure the bishop,
whatever he did, not to deliver her over to a man by whom her hopes
had been so cruelly frustrated; but the tumult of the scene drowned
her voice, and the hurry and confusion overpowered her efforts.
They, however, drew such a degree of attention on her, that, in the
dissentions which religious broils at that time spread in Constance,
she was suspected of pressing thus earnestly towards the person of the
bishop with no good design, and in fine was rudely thrust out of the
palace. She had not recovered from the agitation into which she had
been thrown, when I met her. I eagerly enquired into the cause of her
apparent distress; but she shook her head mournfully, and was silent. I
easily understood where she had been, and the failure of her experiment.

“All then,” said I, “is at an end. Now, Marguerite, you must give up
your experiments, and leave to me the cure of evils of which I only am
the author. I will return this instant to the garden of the palace, and
resume the situation I formerly occupied.”

“For God’s sake, Reginald, what is it you mean? You have just acquired
strength to seek the benefit of air. The least exertion fatigues you.
At this moment, the little walk you have taken has covered you with
perspiration. You could not dig or stoop for a quarter of an hour
without being utterly exhausted.”

“Marguerite, I will not sit down tamely, and see my family expire.
In many cases it is reasonable to bid a valetudinarian take care
of himself. But our situation is beyond that. I must do something.
Extraordinary circumstances often bring along with them extraordinary
strength. No man knows, till the experiment, what he is capable of
effecting. I feel at this moment no debility; and I doubt not that the
despair of my mind will give redoubled energy to my efforts.”

While I spoke thus, I was conscious that I had little more than the
strength of a new-born child. But I could not endure at such a time
to remain in inactivity. I felt as much ashamed of the debilitated
state in which my fever had left me, as I could have done of the most
inglorious effeminacy and cowardice of soul. I determined to relieve
my family, or perish in the attempt. If all my efforts were vain, I
could not better finish my career, than exhausted, sinking, expiring
under a last exertion, to discharge the duties of my station.

We returned into the house. Marguerite took from a closet the last
remnant of provisions we had, the purchase of poor Charles’s labour of
the preceding day. There was a general contest who should escape from
receiving any part in the distribution. Charles had withdrawn himself,
and was not to be found. Julia endeavoured to abscond, but was stopped
by Louisa and her mother. She had wept so much, that inanition seemed
more dangerous for her, than perhaps for any other of the circle. No
one can conceive, who has not felt it, how affecting a contest of this
kind must appear to me, sensible as I was to the danger that their
virtue and generous affection were the prelude only to their common
destruction. I said, there was a general contest who should avoid all
share in the distribution; but I recollect that the little Marguerite,
two years and a half old, exclaimed at first, “I am so hungry, mamma!”
But watching, as she carefully did, every thing that passed, she
presently laid down her bread upon the table in silence, and almost
untouched; and being asked, Why she did so? she replied, in a tone of
speaking sensibility, “Thank you, I am not hungry now!”

This scene made an impression on my mind never to be forgotten. It
blasted and corrupted all the pulses of my soul. A little before, I had
reconciled myself to poverty; I had even brought myself to regard it
with cheerfulness. But the sentiment was now reversed. I could endure
it, I could steel myself against its attacks; but never from this hour,
in the wildest paroxysms of enthusiasm, has it been the topic of my
exultation or my panegyric. No change of circumstances, no inundation
of wealth, has had the power to obliterate from my recollection what I
then saw. A family perishing with hunger; all that is dearest to you
in the world sinking under the most dreadful of all the scourges with
which this sublunary scene is ever afflicted; no help near; no prospect
but of still accumulating distress; a death, the slowest, yet the most
certain and the most agonising, that can befall us: no, there is
nothing that has power to rend all the strings of the heart like this!
From this moment, the whole set of my feelings was changed. Avarice
descended, and took possession of my soul. Haunted, as I perpetually
was, by images of the plague of famine, nothing appeared to me so
valuable as wealth; nothing so desirable as to be placed at the utmost
possible distance from want. An appetite of this kind is insatiable; no
distance seems sufficiently great; no obstacles, mountains on mountains
of gold, appear an inadequate security to bar from us the approach of
the monster we dread.

While I speak of the sentiments which in the sequel were generated in
my mind by what I now saw, I am suspending my narrative in a crisis at
which a family, interesting, amiable and virtuous, is reduced to the
lowest state of humiliation and distress.

They are moments like these, that harden the human heart, and fill
us with inextinguishable hatred and contempt for our species. They
tear off the trappings and decoration of polished society, and show
it in all its hideousness. The wanton eye of pampered pride pleases
itself with the spectacle of cities and palaces, the stately column
and the swelling arch. It observes at hand the busy scene, where all
are occupied in the various pursuits of pleasure or industry; and
admires the concert, the wide-spreading confederacy, by means of which
each after his mode is unconsciously promoting the objects of others.
Cheated by the outside of things, we denominate this a vast combination
for general benefit. The poor and the famished man contemplates the
scene with other thoughts. Unbribed to admire and applaud, he sees in
it a confederacy of hostility and general oppression. He sees every
man pursuing his selfish ends, regardless of the wants of others. He
sees himself contemptuously driven from the circle where the rest of
his fellow-citizens are busily and profitably engaged. He lives in
the midst of a crowd, without one friend to feel an interest in his
welfare. He lives in the midst of plenty, from the participation of
which he is driven by brutal menaces and violence. No man who has not
been placed in his situation can imagine the sensations, with which,
overwhelmed as he is with domestic ruin and despair, he beholds the
riot, the prodigality, the idiot ostentation, the senseless expense,
with which he is surrounded on every side. What were we to do? Were we
to beg along the streets? Were we to in treat for wretched offals at
rich men’s doors? Alas! this, it was to be feared, even if we stooped
to the miserable attempt, instead of satisfying wants for ever new,
would only prolong in the bitterness of anguish the fate for which we
were reserved!----

An unexpected relief at this time presented itself. While the scanty
meal I have mentioned was yet unfinished, a letter was presented me
inclosing under its cover a bill of one hundred crowns. The letter
was from Bernardin, the faithful servant whom we found it necessary
to dismiss three months before, when we quitted our residence in
Switzerland. It informed us that, as soon as he had parted from us,
he had set out on his return to his native town, next adjacent to my
paternal residence; that he found his father had died a short time
before, and that, from the sale of his effects, he had reaped an
inheritance to triple the amount of the sum he had now forwarded to us.
He had heard by accident of the death of our friend in Switzerland, and
the character of his successor, and dreaded that the consequences might
prove highly injurious to us. He had still some business to settle
with the surviving branches of his family, but that would be over in
a few weeks; and then, if we would allow him, he would return to his
dear master, and afford us every assistance in his power. The little
property that had now fallen to him would prevent him from being a
burthen; and he would hire a spot of land, and remain near us, if we
refused him the consolation of returning to his former employment.

What a reproach was it to me, that, descended from one of the most
illustrious families in Europe, the heir of an ample patrimony, and
receiving a still larger fortune in marriage, I should, by the total
neglect and profligate defiance of the duties incumbent on me, have
reduced myself so low as to be indebted to a peasant and a menial for
the means of saving my family from instant destruction! This was a
deep and fatal wound to the pride of my soul. There was however no
alternative, no possibility of rejecting the supply afforded us at so
eventful a moment. We determined to use it for the present, and to
repay it with the earliest opportunity; and in the following week, in
spite of the remonstrances of Marguerite, the yet feeble state of my
health, and the penalties annexed to the proceeding, I set off for the
canton of Soleure, determined, if possible, to wrest the little staff
of my family from the hand that so basely detained it.

I passed through Zurich and a part of the canton of Basle without
obstacle; these parts of Switzerland had not suffered from the calamity
which had occasioned our exile. In proceeding further, I found it
necessary to assume a disguise, and to avoid large towns and frequented
roads. I reached at length the well known scene in which I had so
lately consumed twelve months of my life; in which I first began to
breathe (to breathe, not to be refreshed) from ruin, beggary, and
exile. There was no pleasing recollection annexed to this spot; it was
a remembrancer of shame, sorrow, and remorse. Yet, such is the power of
objects once familiar, revisited after absence, that my eye ran over
them with delight, I felt lightened from the weariness of the journey,
and found that the recollection of pains past over and subdued was
capable of being made a source of gratification. The mountains among
which I had wandered, and consumed, as it were, the last dregs of my
insanity, surrounded me; the path in which I was travelling led along
one of their ridges. I had performed this part of my journey by night;
and the first gleams of day now began to streak the horizon. I looked
towards the cottage, the distant view of which had so often, in moments
of the deepest despair, awakened in my heart the soothings of sympathy
and affection. I saw that as yet it remained in its forlorn condition,
and had undergone no repair; while the lands around, which had lately
experienced the superintendence of Marguerite, had met with more
attention, and began to resume the marks of culture. I sighed for the
return of those days and that situation, which, while present to me,
had passed unheeded and unenjoyed.

I repaired to the house of my late protector, now the residence of
monsieur Grimseld. He was a meagre shrivelled figure; and, though
scarcely arrived at the middle of human life, exhibited all the marks
of a premature old age. I disclosed myself to him, and began warmly to
expostulate with him upon the profligacy of his conduct. He changed
colour, and betrayed symptoms of confusion, the moment I announced
myself. While I pressed him with the barbarity of his conduct, the
dreadful effects it had already produced, and the incontestible justice
of my claim, he stammered, and began to propose terms of accommodation.
During this conversation we were alone. After some time, however, a
servant entered the room, and the countenance of the master assumed an
expression of satisfaction and confidence. He eagerly seized on the
occasion which presented itself, and, instantly changing his tone,
called on his servant to assist him in securing a criminal against
the state. I at first resisted, but Grimseld perceiving this, applied
to his bell with great vehemence, and three other servants made
their appearance, whose employment was in the field, but who had now
accidentally come into the house for refreshment. I had arms; but I
found it impracticable to effect my escape; and I soon felt that, by
yielding to the impulse of indignation, and punishing Grimseld on the
spot for his perfidy, I might ruin but could not forward the affair in
which I was engaged.

I was conducted to prison; and the thoughts produced in me by this
sudden reverse were extremely melancholy and discouraging. Grimseld
was a man of opulence and power; I was without friends, or the means
of procuring friends. The law expressly condemned my return; and what
had I not to fear from law, when abetted and inforced by the hand of
power? I might be imprisoned for ten years; I might be imprisoned for
life. I began earnestly to wish that I had remained with my family, and
given up at least all present hopes of redress. It would be a dreadful
accumulation of all my calamities, if now at last I and my children
were destined to suffer, perhaps to perish, in a state of separation;
and the last consolations of the wretched, those of suffering,
sympathising, and condoling with each other, were denied us.

Full of these tragical forebodings, I threw myself at first on
the floor of my cell in a state little short of the most absolute
despair. I exclaimed upon my adverse fortune, which was never weary of
persecuting me. I apostrophised, with tender and distracted accents,
my wife and children, from whom I now seemed to be cut off by an
everlasting divorce. I called upon death to put an end to these tumults
and emotions of the soul, which were no longer to be borne.

In a short time however I recovered myself, procured the implements
of writing, and drew up, in the strong and impressive language of
truth, a memorial to the council of the state. I was next to consider
how this was to reach its destination; for there was some danger
that it might be intercepted by the vigilance and malignity of my
adversary. I desired to speak with the keeper of the prison. He had
some recollection of me, and a still more distinct one of my family.
He concurred with the general sentiment, in a strong aversion to the
character of Grimseld. As I pressed upon him the hardship of my case,
and the fatal consequences with which it might be attended, I could
perceive that he fully entered into the feeling with which I wished him
to be impressed. He blamed my rashness in returning to Switzerland in
defiance of the positive prohibition that had been issued; but promised
at all events that my paper should be delivered to the president
to-morrow morning.

I remained three days without an answer, and these days were to me an
eternity. I anticipated every kind of misfortune; I believed that law
and malice had succeeded to the subversion of equity. At length however
I was delivered from my apprehensions and perplexity, and summoned to
appear before the council. It was well for me perhaps that I had to
do with a government so simple and moderate as that of Switzerland. I
obtained redress. It was referred to an arbitration of neighbours to
set a fair price on my property, and then decreed, that if monsieur
Grimseld refused the purchase, the sum should be paid me out of the
coffers of the state. He was also condemned in a certain fine for the
fraud he had attempted to commit. The affair, thus put in train, was
soon completed; and I returned with joy, having effected the object
of my journey, to my anxious and expecting family. Soon after, we
removed to the spot we had chosen on the eastern bank of the lake,
where we remained for the six following years in a state of peace and
tranquillity.




CHAPTER XI.


It was in the evening of a summer’s day in the latter end of the
year fifteen hundred and forty-four, that a stranger arrived at my
habitation. He was feeble, emaciated, and pale, his forehead full of
wrinkles, and his hair and beard as white as snow. Care was written
in his face; it was easy to perceive that he had suffered much from
distress of mind; yet his eye was still quick and lively, with a strong
expression of suspiciousness and anxiety. His garb, which externally
consisted of nothing more than a robe of russet brown, with a girdle
of the same, was coarse, threadbare, and ragged. He supported his
tottering steps with a staff; and, having lost his foreteeth, his
speech was indistinct and difficult to be comprehended. His wretched
appearance excited my compassion, at the same time that I could easily
discern, beneath all its disadvantages, that he was no common beggar or
rustic. Ruined and squalid as he appeared, I thought I could perceive
traces in his countenance of what had formerly been daring enterprise,
profound meditation, and generous humanity.

I saw that he was much fatigued, and I invited him to rest himself upon
the bench before the door. I set before him bread and wine, and he
partook of both. I asked him his name and his country. He told me that
he was a Venetian, and that his name, as nearly as I could collect, was
signor Francesco Zampieri. He seemed however averse to speaking, and he
requested me to suffer him to pass the night in my habitation. There
was nothing singular in the request, a hospitality of this sort being
the practice of the neighbourhood; and humanity would have prompted
my compliance, if I had not been still more strongly urged by an
undefinable curiosity that began to spring up in my bosom. I prepared
for him a camp-bed in a summer-house at the end of my garden. As soon
as it was ready, he desired to be left alone, that he might seek in
rest some relief from the fatigue he had undergone.

He retired early; and therefore, soon after daybreak the next morning,
I waited on him to enquire how he had rested. He led me out into the
fields; the morning was genial and exhilarating. We proceeded, till
we came to a retired spot which had frequently been the scene of my
solitary meditations, and there seated ourselves upon a bank. We had
been mutually silent during the walk. As soon as we were seated, the
stranger began: “You are, I understand, a Frenchman, and your name the
count de St. Leon?” I bowed assent.

“St. Leon,” said he, “there is something in your countenance and manner
that prepossesses me in your favour. The only thing I have left to do
in the world is to die; and what I seek at present, is a friend who
will take care that I shall be suffered to die in peace. Shall I trust
you? Will you be that friend to me?”

I was astonished at this way of commencing his confidence in me; but I
did not hesitate to promise that he should not find me deficient in any
thing that became a man of humanity and honour.

“You do not, I think, live alone? You have a wife and children.”

“I have.”

“Yet none of them were at home when I arrived last night. You brought
yourself to the summer-house every thing that was necessary for my
accommodation.”

“I did so. But I have a wife to whom I have been married seventeen
years, and with whom I have no reserves. I told her of your arrival; I
spoke of your appearance; I mentioned your name.”

“It is no matter. She has not seen me. My name is not Zampieri; I am no
Venetian.”

“Who are you then?”

“That you shall never know. It makes no part of the confidence I design
to repose in you. My name shall be buried with me in the grave; nor
shall any one who has hitherto known me, know how, at what time, or
on what spot of earth, I shall terminate my existence. The cloud of
oblivion shall shelter me from all human curiosity. What I require of
you is that you pledge your honour, and the faith of a man, that you
will never reveal to your wife, your children, or any human being, what
you may hereafter know of me, and that no particular that relates to my
history shall be disclosed, till at least one hundred years after my
decease.”

“Upon these conditions I am sorry that I must decline your confidence.
My wife is a part of myself; for the last six years at least I have had
no thought in which she has not participated; and these have been the
most tranquil and happy years of my life. My heart was formed by nature
for social ties; habit has confirmed their propensity; and I will not
now consent to any thing that shall infringe on the happiness of my
soul.”

While I spoke, I could perceive that my companion grew disturbed and
angry. At length, turning towards me a look of ineffable contempt, he
replied--

“Feeble and effeminate mortal! You are neither a knight nor a
Frenchman! Or rather, having been both, you have forgotten in
inglorious obscurity every thing worthy of either! Was ever gallant
action achieved by him who was incapable of separating himself from a
woman? Was ever a great discovery prosecuted, or an important benefit
conferred upon the human race, by him who was incapable of standing,
and thinking, and feeling, alone? Under the usurping and dishonoured
name of virtue, you have sunk into a slavery baser than that of the
enchantress Alcina. In vain might honour, worth, and immortal renown
proffer their favours to him who has made himself the basest of all
sublunary things--the puppet of a woman, the plaything of her pleasure,
wasting an inglorious life in the gratification of her wishes and the
performance of her commands!”

I felt that I was not wholly unmoved at this expostulation. The
stranger touched upon the first and foremost passions of my soul;
passions the operation of which had long been suspended, but which
were by no means extinguished in my bosom. He proceeded:--

“But it is well! Years have passed over my head in vain, and I have
not learnt to distinguish a man of honour from a slave. This is only
one additional sorrow to those in which my life has been spent. I
have wandered through every region of the earth, and have found
only disappointment. I have entered the courts of princes; I have
accompanied the march of armies; I have pined in the putridity of
dungeons. I have tasted every vicissitude of splendour and meanness;
five times have I been led to the scaffold, and with difficulty
escaped a public execution. Hated by mankind, hunted from the face
of the earth, pursued by every atrocious calumny, without a country,
without a roof, without a friend; the addition that can be made to such
misfortunes scarcely deserves a thought.”

While he spoke, curiosity, resistless curiosity, presented itself as a
new motive, in aid of the sense of shame which the stranger had just
before kindled in my bosom. His manner was inconceivably impressive;
his voice, though inarticulate from age, had an irresistible melody
and volume of sound, which awed, while it won, the heart. His front
appeared open, large, and commanding; and, though he complained, his
complaints seemed to be those of conscious dignity and innocence. He
went on:--

“Farewell, St. Leon! I go, and you shall see me and hear of me no
more. You will repent, when it is too late, the folly of this day’s
determination. I appear mean and insignificant in your eyes. You think
my secrets beneath your curiosity, and my benefits not worth your
acceptance. Know that my benefits are such as kings would barter their
thrones to purchase, and that my wealth exceeds the wealth of empires.
You are degraded from the rank you once held among mankind; your
children are destined to live in the inglorious condition of peasants.
This day you might have redeemed all your misfortunes, and raised
yourself to a station more illustrious than that to which you were
born. Farewell! Destiny has marked out you and yours for obscurity and
oblivion, and you do well to reject magnificence and distinction when
they proffer themselves for your acceptance.”

“Stop,” cried I, “mysterious stranger! Grant me a moment’s leisure to
reflect and determine.”

He had risen to depart, with a gesture of resolution and contempt. At
my exclamation he paused, and again turned himself towards me. My soul
was in tumults.

“Answer me, most ambiguous and impenetrable of mortals! What is thy
story? and what the secrets, the disclosure of which is pregnant with
consequences so extraordinary?”

“Do you recollect the conditions upon which only the disclosure can be
made?”

“What can I say? Shall I determine to part with that which for years
has constituted the only consolation of my life? Shall I suppress the
curiosity which now torments me, and reject the boon you pretend to
have the power to confer?”

“I grant you the interval for reflection you demand. I refuse to place
further confidence in you, till you have maturely examined yourself,
and roused all the energies of your spirit to encounter the task you
undertake.”

“One word more. You know not, indeed you know not, what a woman you
exclude from your confidence. She is more worthy of it than I am.
Referring to my own experience and knowledge of the world, I can safely
pronounce her the first of her sex, perhaps the first of human beings.
Indulge me in this; include her in your confidence; and I am content.”

“Be silent! I have made my determination; do you make yours! Know I
would not if I could, and cannot if I would, repose the secrets that
press upon me in more than a single bosom. It was upon this condition
I received the communication; upon this condition only can I impart
it. I am resolved; to die is the election of my soul--a consummation
for which I impatiently wait. Having determined therefore to withdraw
myself from the powers committed to me, I am at liberty to impart them;
upon the same condition, and no other, you may one day, if you desire
it, seek the relief of confidence.”

Having thus spoken, the stranger rose from his seat. It was yet early
morning, nor was it likely we should meet any one in our walk. He
however employed the precaution of causing me to explore the path,
and to see that we should return uninterrupted. We came back to the
summer-house. The window-shutters were still closed; the stranger
determined they should remain so. When I had come to him as soon as
I rose, I had found the door secured; nor had he admitted me, till
he recognised my voice, and had ascertained that I was alone. These
precautions scarcely excited my attention at the time; but, after the
conversation that had just passed, they returned distinctly to my
memory.

The remainder of the day which had been opened by this extraordinary
scene was passed by me in great anxiety. I ruminated with unceasing
wonder and perturbation upon the words of the stranger. Shall I shut
upon myself the gate of knowledge and information? Is it not the part
of a feeble and effeminate mind to refuse instruction, because he is
not at liberty to communicate that instruction to another--to a wife?
The stranger professes to be able to raise me to the utmost height of
wealth and distinction. Shall I refuse the gift, which in a former
instance I forfeited, but for which, though contemplated as at an
impracticable distance, my whole soul longs? If there is any thing
dishonourable connected with the participation of this wealth, I shall
still be at liberty to refuse it. There can be no crime in hearing
what this man has to communicate. I shall still, and always, be master
of myself; nor can I have any thing personally to fear from a man so
feeble, so decrepit, so emaciated. Yet what can be the gifts worthy of
acceptance of a man who, while he possesses them, is tired of life, and
desires to die? or what the wealth of him who bears about him every
external symptom of poverty and desolation?

The conversation I had just held revived in my mind the true feeling
of my present situation. The wounds of my soul had been lulled into
temporary insensibility; but they were in a state in which the
slightest accident was capable of making them bleed afresh, and
with all their former violence. I had rather steeled my mind to
endure what seemed unavoidable, than reconciled myself to my fate.
The youthful passions of my soul, which my early years had written
there in characters so deep, were by no means effaced. I could not
contemplate the splendour of rank with an impartial eye. I could not
think of the alternative of distinction or obscurity for my children
with indifference. But, most of all, the moment I had experienced for
them of hunger, and impending destruction by famine, had produced an
indelible impression. It had destroyed all romance, I had almost said
all dignity, in my mind for ever. It had snapped, as by the touch of a
red-hot iron, all the finer and more etherialised sinews of my frame.
It had planted the sordid love of gold in my heart, there, by its
baneful vegetation, to poison every nobler and more salubrious feeling.

When I returned to the house, Marguerite enquired of me respecting
the stranger, but my answers were short and embarrassed. She seemed
to wonder that he did not come into the house, and partake of some
refreshment in the midst of my family. She asked, whether he were
indisposed? and whether he did not stand in need of some assistance
that she might afford him? Perceiving however that I was desirous of
saying as little as possible respecting him, she presently became
silent. I could see that she was hurt at my incommunicativeness, yet
I could not prevail upon myself to enter into an explanation of the
causes of my taciturnity. Ours was a family of love; and I could
observe that the children sympathised with their mother, and secretly
were surprised at and lamented my reserve. There would have been little
in this, in perhaps any other family than ours. But the last six years
had been spent by us in such primeval simplicity, that scarcely one of
us had a thought but what was known to the rest. Marguerite cherished
my frankness and unreserve with peculiar zeal; she remembered with
bitterness of soul the periods in which I fostered conceptions only
proper to myself--periods of dreadful calamity, or of rooted melancholy
and sadness. She could not help regarding the silence into which for
the present occasion I relapsed, as a portent of evil augury. Charles,
who was now sixteen years of age, recollected the period of our ruined
fortunes when he had been alone with me at Paris, and partook of his
mother’s feelings.

A trifling circumstance, at this time occasioned by the little
Marguerite, now eight years of age, rendered the restraint under which
I laboured more memorable and striking. She had left a little book
of fairy tales, in which she had been reading the day before, in the
summer-house. At first she did not recollect what was become of it, and
employed herself in searching for it with great assiduity. Of a sudden
however she remembered where she had read in it last; and, exclaiming
with exultation, “It is in the summer-house!” sprang forward to fetch
it. I detained her, and told her there was a sick gentleman there that
she would disturb! “Then, dear Julia!” rejoined she, “be so good as
to get it for me; you are so quiet and careful, you never disturb any
body.”

“My love,” answered I, “nobody must get it for you. The gentleman
chooses to be alone, and will not let any body come to him. You shall
have it after dinner.”

“Ah, but, papa, I want it now. I put it away, just where the naughty
giant had shut up the gentleman in the dungeon, who came to take away
the lady. I was obliged to put it away then, because mamma called me to
go to bed; but I want so to know what will become of them, you cannot
think.”

“Well, dear Marguerite, I am sorry you must wait; but you must learn to
have patience.”

“Do you know, papa, I walked in the garden before breakfast: and so,
not thinking of any thing, I came to the summer-house; and I tried to
open the door, but I could not. I found it was locked. So I thought
Julia was there; and I knocked, and called Julia, but nobody answered.
So then I knew Julia was not there, for I was sure she would have
opened the door. So I climbed upon the stump of the pear-tree, and
tried to look in at the window; but the shutters were shut, and I
could not get to see over the top of them. And I walked all round the
summer-house, and all the shutters were shut. Papa, I wish you would
not let a man get into the summer-house, who shuts all the shutters,
and locks the door. You always used to let me go into every room I
liked; and, do you know, I think none but bad people lock and bolt
themselves up so. It puts mind of the giants with their drawbridges and
their pitfalls; I shall be quite afraid of this frightful old man.”

This prattle of the child was nothing; yet it increased the
embarrassment of my situation, and made the peculiarity of the case
more conspicuous. Finding her pertinacious in insisting upon a topic
that was disagreeable to me, her mother called her from me, and put
her upon some occupation that served to divert her attention. I felt
like a person that was guilty of some crime; and this consideration and
kindness of my wife, when I seemed to myself to deserve her reproach,
had not the power to calm my uneasiness.

These little occurrences appeared like the beginning of a separation
of interests, and estrangement of hearts. I tasked myself severely. I
summoned the whole force of my mind, that I might strictly consider
what it was in which I was about to engage. If this slight and casual
hint of a secret is felt by both Marguerite and myself with so much
uneasiness and embarrassment, what will be our situation, if I go on
to accept the stranger’s confidence, and become the depository of an
arcanum so important as he represents his to be? He declares himself
able to bestow upon me the highest opulence; what will be the feelings
of my wife and children when they see my condition suddenly changed
from its present humble appearance to splendour and wealth, without
being able to assign the source of this extraordinary accession?

It is difficult to conceive a family picture more enviable that than
to which I was now continually present, and of which I formed a part.
We had been happy on the banks of the Garonne, and we had pictured
to ourselves a plan of happiness immediately on our arrival in the
city of Constance. But these were little and imperfect, compared with
what I now enjoyed. In the first situation my children were infants,
and in the second the eldest was but ten years of age. The mother
was now thirty-five; and she had lost, in my eyes at least, none
of her personal attractions. Her intellectual accomplishments were
much greater than ever. Her understanding was matured, her judgment
decided, her experience more comprehensive. As she had a greater
compass of materials to work upon, her fancy was more playful, her
conversation richer, and her reflections more amusing and profound.
The matron character she had acquired, had had no other effect on her
feelings, than to render them more deep, more true and magnetical.
Her disposition was more entirely affectionate than it had been even
in the first year of our cohabitation. Her attachment to her children
was exemplary, and her vigilance uninterrupted; and, for myself, she
was accustomed, in all that related to our mutual love, to enter into
my sentiments and inclinations with so just a tone of equality and
kindness, that we seemed to be two bodies animated by a single soul.
If the mother were improved, the children were still more improved.
In their early years we are attached to our offspring, merely because
they are ours, and in a way that has led superficial speculators
to consider the attachment, less as the necessary operation of a
sensible and conscious mind, than as a wise provision of nature for
the perpetuation of the species. But as they grow up, the case is
different. Our partiality is then confirmed or diminished by qualities
visible to an impartial bystander as really as to ourselves. They
then cease to be merely the objects of our solicitude, and become our
companions, the partners of our sentiments, and the counsellors of our
undertakings. Such at least was my case at the present period. Charles,
who was now sixteen, was manly beyond his years; while the native fire
of his disposition was tempered by adversity, by an humble situation,
and by the ardour of filial and fraternal affection. Julia, who was
two years younger, became daily more interesting by the mildness of
her disposition and the tenderness of her sensibility. Louisa was only
twelve; but, as she was extremely notable, and had an uncommonly quick
and accurate spirit of imitation, she rendered herself exceedingly
useful to her mother. Marguerite, the plaything and amusement of the
family, had, as I have said, just completed the eighth year of her age.

One exquisite source of gratification, when it is not a source of
uneasiness, to speak from my own experience, which a parent finds in
the society of his children, is their individuality. They are not
puppets, moved with wires, and to be played on at will. Almost from the
hour of their birth they have a will of their own, to be consulted and
negotiated with. We may say to them, as Adam to the general mother of
mankind, “But now, thou wert flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone;
and, even now, thou standest before me vested in the prerogatives of
sentiment and reason; a living being, to be regarded with attention and
deference; to be courted, not compelled; susceptible of the various
catalogue of human passions; capable of resentment and gratitude, of
indignation and love, of perverseness and submission. It is because
thou art thus formed that I love thee. I cannot be interested about
objects inanimate or brute. I require a somewhat that shall exercise
my judgment, and awaken my moral feelings. It is necessary to me to
approve myself, and be approved by another. I rejoice to stand before
you, at once the defendant and the judge. I rejoice in the restraint to
which your independent character subjects me, and it will be my pride
to cultivate that independence in your mind. I would negotiate for your
affections and confidence, and not be loved by you, but in proportion
as I shall have done something to deserve it. I could not congratulate
myself upon your correspondence to my wishes, if it had not been in
your power to withhold it.”

While I indulge this vein of reflection, I seem again to see my family,
as they surrounded me in the year fifteen hundred and forty-four;
Marguerite the partner of my life, Charles the brother of my cares, the
blooming Julia, the sage Louisa, and the playful cadette of the family.
How richly furnished, how cheerful, how heart-reviving, appeared to
me the apartment in which they were assembled! I dwell upon the image
with fond affection and lingering delight. Where are they now? How
has all this happiness been maliciously undermined, and irrevocably
destroyed! To look back on it, it seems like the idle fabric of a
dream. I awake, and find myself alone! Were there really such persons?
Where are they dispersed? Whither are they gone? Oh, miserable solitude
and desertion, to which I have so long been condemned! I see nothing
around me but speechless walls, or human faces that say as little to my
heart as the walls themselves! How palsied is my soul! How withered my
affections!--But I will not anticipate.




CHAPTER XII.


I carried food to the stranger as occasion required in the course of
the day. He seemed indisposed to speak, and we exchanged scarcely more
than two or three words. The next morning was the implied time to which
the question of his confidence was deferred, and I went to him with the
full resolution of refusing it. Whether it were that he discerned this
resolution in my countenance, or that, in the interval that elapsed,
he had formed a meaner opinion of my character, and thought me unfit
for the purposes he intended I should answer, certain it is that he
anticipated me. At the same time he magnified the importance of the
gifts he had to communicate. He expressed himself astonished at the
precipitateness of his yesterday’s conduct. It was not till after much
trial and long probation that he could choose himself a confidant.
I was not at present fit for the character, nor perhaps ever should
be. The talent he possessed was one upon which the fate of nations
and of the human species might be made to depend. God had given it
for the best and highest purposes; and the vessel in which it was
deposited must be purified from the alloy of human frailty. It might be
abused and applied to the most atrocious designs. It might blind the
understanding of the wisest, and corrupt the integrity of the noblest.
It might overturn kingdoms, and change the whole order of human society
into anarchy and barbarism. It might render its possessor the universal
plague or the universal tyrant of mankind.

“Go, St. Leon!” added the stranger, “you are not qualified for so
important a trust. You are not yet purged of imbecility and weakness.
Though you have passed through much, and had considerable experience,
you are yet a child. I had heard your history, and expected to find
you a different man. Go; and learn to know yourself for what you are,
frivolous and insignificant, worthy to have been born a peasant, and
not fitted to adorn the rolls of chivalry, or the rank to which you
were destined!”

There was something so impressive in the rebuke and contempt of this
venerable sage, that made it impossible to contend with them. Never was
there a man more singular, and in whom were united greater apparent
contradictions. Observe him in a quiet and unanimated moment, you might
almost take him for a common beggar; a poor, miserable wretch, in whom
life lingered, and insensate stupidity reigned. But when his soul was
touched in any of those points on which it was most alive, he rose at
once, and appeared a giant. His voice was the voice of thunder; and,
rolling in a rich and sublime swell, it arrested and stilled, while
it withered all the nerves of the soul. His eye-beam sat upon your
countenance, and seemed to look through you. You wished to escape from
its penetrating power, but you had not the strength to move. I began to
feel as if it were some mysterious and superior being in human form,
and not a mortal, with whom I was concerned.

What a strange and contradictory being is man! I had gone to the
summer-house this morning, with a firm resolution to refuse the gifts
and the communication of the stranger. I felt as if lightened from
a burthen which the whole preceding day had oppressed me, while I
formed this resolution: I was cheerful, and conscious of rectitude and
strength of mind. How cheaply we prize a gift which we imagine to be
already in our power! With what philosophical indifference do we turn
it on every side, depreciate its worth, magnify its disadvantages, and
then pique ourselves upon the sobriety and justice of the estimate
we have made! Thus it was with me in the present transaction; but
when I had received the check of the stranger, and saw the proposed
benefit removed to a vast and uncertain distance, then it resumed all
its charms; then the contrast of wealth and poverty flashed full
upon my soul. Before, I had questioned the reality of the stranger’s
pretensions, and considered whether he might not be an artful impostor;
but now all was clearness and certainty: the advantages of wealth
passed in full review before my roused imagination. I saw horses,
palaces, and their furniture; I saw the splendour of exhibition and
the trains of attendants,--objects which had been for ever dear to my
puerile imagination; I contemplated the honour, love, obedience, troops
of friends, which are so apt to attend upon wealth, when disbursed with
a moderate degree of dignity and munificence. When I compared this with
my present poverty and desertion, the meanness of our appearance, our
daily labours, the danger that an untoward accident might sink us in
the deepest distress, and the hopelessness that my son or his posterity
should ever rise to that honour and distinction to which they had once
been destined, the effect was too powerful.

Another feeling came still further in aid of this: it was the
humiliating impression which the stranger had left upon my mind: this
seemed to be his great art, if in reality his conduct is to be imputed
to art. There is no enemy to virtue so fatal as a sense of degradation.
Self-applause is our principal support in every liberal and elevated
act of virtue. If this ally can be turned against us; if we can be
made to ascribe baseness, effeminacy, want of spirit and adventure, to
our virtuous resolutions; we shall then indeed feel ourselves shaken.
This was precisely my situation: the figure I made in my own eyes was
mean; I was impatient of my degradation; I believed that I had shown
myself uxorious and effeminate, at a time that must have roused in me
the spirit of a man, if there had been a spark of manly spirit latent
in my breast. This impatience co-operated with the temptations of
the stranger, and made me anxious to possess what he offered to my
acceptance.

I reasoned thus with myself: what excites my scruples is simply the
idea of having one single secret from my wife and family. This scruple
is created by the singular and unprecedented confidence in which we
have been accustomed to live. Other men have their secrets: nor do they
find their domestic tranquillity broken by that circumstance. The
merchant does not call his wife into consultation upon his ventures;
the statesman does not unfold to her his policy and his projects; the
warrior does not take her advice upon the plan of his campaign; the
poet does not concert with her his flights and his episodes. To other
men the domestic scene is the relaxation of their cares; when they
enter it, they dismiss the business of the day, and call another cause.
I only have concentrated in it the whole of my existence. By this means
I have extinguished in myself the true energy of the human character.
A man can never be respectable in the eyes of the world or in his own,
except so far as he stands by himself and is truly independent. He may
have friends; he may have domestic connections; but he must not in
these connections lose his individuality. Nothing truly great was ever
achieved, that was not executed or planned in solitary seclusion.

But if these reasons are sufficient to prove that the plan I have
lately pursued is fundamentally wrong, how much more will the
importance of what is proposed by the stranger plead my excuse for
deviating from it? How bitterly have I lamented the degradation of
my family! Shall I not seize this opportunity of re-installing them
in their hereditary honours? I deemed the ruin I had brought upon
them irreparable; shall I not embrace the occasion of atoning for my
fault? No man despises wealth, who fully understands the advantages
it confers. Does it not confer the means of cultivating our powers?
Does it not open to us the career of honour, which is shut against
the unknown and obscure? Does it not conciliate the prepossessions of
mankind, and gain for us an indulgent and liberal construction? Does
it not inspire us with graceful confidence, and animate us to generous
adventure? The poor man is denied every advantage of education, and
wears out his life in labour and ignorance. From offices of trust,
from opportunities of distinction, he is ignominiously thrust aside;
and though he should sacrifice his life for the public cause, he dies
unhonoured and unknown. If by any accident he comes into possession
of those qualities which, when discerned and acknowledged, command
the applause of mankind, who will listen to him? His appearance is
mean; and the fastidious auditor turns from him ere half his words are
uttered. He has no equipage and attendants, no one to blow the trumpet
before him and proclaim his rank; how can he propose any thing that
shall be worthy of attention? Aware of the prepossession of mankind in
this respect, he is alarmed and overwhelmed with confusion before he
opens his lips. Filled with the conscience of his worth, he anticipates
the unmerited contempt that is prepared to oppress him, and his very
heart dies within him. Add to these circumstances, the constitution of
our nature, the various pleasures of which it is adapted to partake,
and how many of these pleasures it is in the power of wealth to
procure. Yes; an object like this will sufficiently apologise for me to
those for whose sake alone it was estimable in my sight. It is, indeed,
nothing but our poverty and the lowness of our station that have thus
produced in us an habitual and unreserved communication of sentiments.
Wealth would, to a certain degree, destroy our contact, and take off
the wonder that we had each our thoughts that were not put into the
common stock.

These considerations decided my choice. I was not indeed without some
variations of mind, and some compunction of heart for the resolution
I had espoused. The longer the stranger remained with me, the more
evident it was that there was something mysterious between us; and
the unreserved affection and union that had lately reigned under my
roof suffered materially the effects of it. The stranger had been led
to my cottage, in the first instance, by the entire solitude in which
it was placed. There was nothing about which he was so solicitous as
concealment; the most atrocious criminal could not be more alarmed at
the idea of being discovered. I was unable to account for this; but
I was now too anxious for his stay and the promised reward, not to
be alert in gratifying all his wishes. The most inviolable secrecy,
therefore, was enjoined to the whole family; and the younger branches
of it, particularly the little Marguerite, it was necessary to keep
almost immured, to prevent the danger of their reporting any thing out
of the house, that might be displeasing to the stranger and fatal to my
expectations. Upon the whole my situation was eminently an uneasy one.
No experiment can be more precarious than that of a half-confidence;
and nothing but the sincere affection that was entertained for me could
have rendered it successful in this instance. My family felt that they
were trusted by me only in points where it was impossible to avoid it,
and that I was not therefore properly entitled to their co-operation;
I was conscious of ingratitude in making them no return for their
fidelity. They kept my secret because they were solicitous to oblige
me, not from any conviction that they were conferring on me a benefit;
but, on the contrary, suspecting that the object as to which they
were blindly assisting me would prove injurious to me as well as to
themselves.

The health of the stranger visibly declined; but this was a
circumstance which he evidently regarded with complacency. It was
the only source of consolation of which he appeared susceptible; his
mind was torn with painful remembrances, and agitated with terrible
forebodings. He abhorred solitude, and yet found no consolation in
society. I could not be much with him; my duty to my family, who were
principally supported by my labour, was a call too imperious to be
neglected. Even when I was with him, he commonly testified no desire
for conversation. “Stay with me,” he was accustomed to say; “give
me as much of your time as you can; but do not talk.” Upon these
occasions he would sit sometimes with his arms folded, and with the
most melancholy expression imaginable. He would then knit his brows,
wring his hands with a sadness that might have excited pity in the
hardest breast, or, with both hands closed, the one clasping the other,
strike himself impatiently on the forehead. At other times he would
rise from his seat, pace the room with hurried and unquiet steps, and
then again throw himself on his couch in the greatest agitation. His
features were often convulsed with agony. Often have I wiped away the
sweat, which would suddenly burst out in large drops on his forehead.
At those seasons he would continually mutter words to himself, the
sense of which it was impossible for me to collect. I could perceive
however that he often repeated the names of Clara!--Henry!--a wife!--a
friend! a friend!----and then he would groan as if his heart were
bursting. Sometimes, in the midst of these recollections, he would pass
the back of his hand over his eyes; and then, looking at it, shaking
his head, and biting his under lip, exclaim with a piteous accent,
“Dry!--dry!--all the moisture of my frame is perished!” Then, as if
recovering himself, he would cry with a startled and terrified voice,
“Who is there? St. Leon? Come to me! Let me feel that there is a human
being near me! I often call for you; but I find myself alone, deserted,
friendless!--friendless!”

At times when his recollection was more complete, he would say, “I know
I tire you! Why should I tire you? What gratification can it be to me
to occasion emotions of disgust?” Upon these occasions I endeavoured to
soothe him, and assured him I found pleasure in administering to his
relief. But he replied, “No, no: do not flatter me! It is long since
I have heard the voice of flattery! I never loved it! No; I know I am
precluded from ever exciting friendship or sympathy! Why am I not dead?
Why do I live, a burthen to myself, useful to none? My secret I could
almost resolve should die with me; but you have earned, and you shall
receive it.”

The stranger was not always in this state of extreme anguish, nor
always indisposed to converse. He had lucid intervals; and could
beguile the sorrow of his heart with social communication. We sometimes
talked of various sciences and branches of learning; he appeared to
be well informed in them all. His observations were ingenious; his
language copious; his illustrations fanciful and picturesque; his
manner bold and penetrating. It was easy to observe in him the marks
of a vigorous and masculine genius. Sometimes we discussed the events
at that time going on in the world. When we discoursed of events that
had passed, and persons that had died, more than a century before,
the stranger often spoke of them in a manner as if he had been an
eye-witness, and directly acquainted with the objects of our discourse.
This I ascribed to the vividness of his conceptions, and the animation
of his language. He however often checked himself in this peculiarity,
and always carefully avoided what could lead to any thing personal
to himself. I described to him the scenes of my youth, and related
my subsequent history; he on his part was invincibly silent on every
circumstance of his country, his family, and his adventures.

The longer I was acquainted with him, the more my curiosity grew. I
was restless and impatient to learn something respecting a man who
thus wrapped himself up in mystery and reserve. Often I threw out, as
it were, a line by which to fathom his secret. I talked of various
countries, I mentioned different kinds of calamities and even of
crimes, that by some incidental allusion I might discover at unawares
his country, his connections, or the nature of his story. When any
thing that offered seemed to lead to the desired point, I doubled my
questions, and endeavoured to construct them with the skill of a crafty
litigant in a court of justice. There were some subjects, the very
mention of which gave him uneasiness, and upon which he immediately
silenced me; but these were not of themselves enough to afford me a
clue, or to furnish materials out of which for me to construct the
history of the stranger. He did not always perceive the drift of my
questions and snares; but, when he did, he generally became loud,
resentful, and furious. There was nothing else that so completely
roused his indignation.

“St. Leon!” said he to me one day, “silence this inquisitive temper
of yours; check your rash and rude curiosity. The only secret I have
that can be of any importance to you, you shall one day know. But my
country, my family, my adventures, I have once told you, and I tell
you again, you shall never know. That knowledge can be of moment to no
one, and it shall never be disclosed. When this heart ceases to beat,
that tale shall cease to have a place on the face of the earth. Why
should my distresses and disgraces be published to any one? Is it not
enough that they have lacerated my bosom, that they have deprived me
of friends, that they have visited me with every adversity and every
anguish, that they have bowed me down to the earth, that they have made
thought, and remembrance, and life itself, a burthen too heavy to be
borne? Your present injudicious conduct, if persisted in, will have the
effect of driving me from your roof, of turning me once more upon the
world, upon that world that I hate, upon that world whose bruises and
ill treatment I feel in every fibre of my frame; of exposing me again
to fresh persecutions, and causing me to perish miserably in a dungeon,
or die upon a scaffold. Spare me, my generous host; I know you are
capable of generosity. Indeed I have endured enough to satiate the rage
of malice itself. You see what I suffer from the rage and tempest of
my own thoughts, even without the assistance of any external foe. Let
me die in that degree of tranquillity I am able to attain. I will not
trouble you long.”

At another time he addressed me in a different style. “You see, St.
Leon, that the anguish of mind I endure is such as is ordinarily
attributed to the recollection of great crimes; and you have very
probably conjectured that in my case it arises from the same source. If
you have, I forgive you; but I assure you that you are mistaken. Take
from yourself that uneasiness, if it has ever visited you; you are not
giving sanctuary to a villain! I am innocent. I can take no crime to
my charge. I have suffered more almost than man ever suffered; but I
have sinned little. The cause of my uneasiness and prime source of all
my misfortunes, I dare not disclose to you. Be contented with the plan
of my conduct. I have digested my purpose: I have determined where to
speak and where to be silent.”

The more I saw of this man, the more strange and unaccountable appeared
to me every thing that related to him. Why was he so poor, possessing,
as he pretended, inexhaustible wealth? Why was he unhappy, with so
great talents and genius, and such various information? Why was he
friendless, being, as he solemnly assured me, so perfectly innocent,
and of consequence so respectable? That he was an impostor, every
thing that I saw of him forbade me to believe. His sorrows were too
profound and excruciating, for it to be possible for me to rank them
among the actions that a man may play. The greatness of his powers, the
dignity of his carriage, the irresistible appearance of sincerity that
sparkled in his eye and modulated his voice, fully convinced me that he
really was what he pretended to be. I had heard of men who, under the
pretence of alchemy, fastened themselves upon persons possessing sums
of money; and, beguiling them with a delusive expectation of wealth,
reduced them to beggary and ruin. One such person I had had a brief
connection with during my residence in the Bordelois, though, finding
the incident by no means essential to the progress of my history, I
have passed it over, together with many others, in silence. But nothing
could be more unlike than that man and the person respecting whom I was
now concerned. In reality I possessed at that time, if I may be allowed
to say so, a more than common insight into the characters of mankind,
so as to be little likely, except under the tyranny of passion, as
in the instance of gaming, to be made the prey of imposition. I had
studied my species as it exhibits itself in history, and had mixed with
it in various scenes and under dissimilar aspects. I had accordingly,
in the transaction I have just alluded to, soon detected the plans of
the villain who expected to delude me. But what could be the purpose
of the stranger in this respect? The pretended alchemist in France had
obtained a certain sum of money of me, and demanded more. The stranger
never made such a demand of me; and perfectly knew that, even if I had
been inclined, I was not able to supply him. The alchemist had amused
me with descriptions of various processes for the transmutation of
metals, had exhibited his crucibles and retorts, and employed a sort
of dramatic _coup d’œil_ for the purpose of awakening my curiosity
and stimulating my passions. The stranger had simply stated, in the
plainest and most direct manner, that it was in his power to enrich
me; but had been silent as to the manner of producing the wealth he
promised, and had abstained from every effort to intoxicate my mind. I
felt therefore in this instance the effect, that, without being able
to solve the difficulties and contrarieties that hung about him, I yet
believed his assertions; nor was the inscrutability of his history and
his motives capable of shaking my confidence.

One day, during the period of his concealment, certain officers of
the bishop of Constance, accompanied by a foreigner in a Neapolitan
habit, came to my house, and, as it proved, with the express purpose
of searching for the man who had put himself under my protection.
Charles and myself were at work in the fields within sight of the
lake. Their appearance first caught the attention of Charles as they
approached the shore, and he enquired of me respecting the habit of
the foreigner, which was different from any he had been accustomed to
see. While we were yet speaking, I observed in them an intention to
land within sight of my cottage. This was an uncommon circumstance;
our privacy was rarely invaded, and we lived almost as much out of the
world as we should have done in the remotest island of the Atlantic
ocean. I reasoned in my own mind upon their appearance: they had
little resemblance to a party of pleasure; the habit of the officers
of justice I was perfectly acquainted with; and the suspicion of the
real nature of their errand immediately darted on my thoughts. Without
saying a word to Charles on the subject, I hastened with all the speed
I could exert to the apartment of the stranger, and acquainted him with
what I had seen. He concurred with me in the ideas I had formed, and
appeared much shocked at the intelligence. There was however no time to
be lost; and, after having for a moment given vent to an anguish which
was too powerful to be suppressed, he withdrew as hastily as he could
from the summer-house, and betook himself to the woods. He recommended
to me to leave him, telling me that he could conceal himself most
effectually alone, and observing that it would be necessary for me to
meet the officers, and endeavour as much as possible to remove their
suspicions.

Accordingly, as soon as he was gone, I threw open the windows of the
summer-house, removed the shutters, and took from it as effectually
as I could all appearance of having served as a place of concealment.
This was a precaution which the stranger had on a former occasion
recommended to me. It fortunately happened that Julia and the little
Marguerite were gone out together in the fields on the eastern side of
my cottage; otherwise infallibly the child by her innocent prattle,
and perhaps Julia by the apprehensive sensibility of her temper, would
have betrayed our secret, or at least have suggested to the officers
a feeling as if, by a longer stay and a more diligent search, they
might possibly succeed in the object of their expedition. As it was, I
received them at the door, and learned from their own mouths the nature
of their errand. Of Charles, whom they had crossed in the fields,
they had simply asked whether they were right as to the name of the
person who was proprietor of the cottage before them. They described
to me with great accuracy the appearance of the stranger, and insisted
that he had been an inhabitant of my cottage. They told me, they were
well informed that the summer-house in my garden had carefully been
shut up for more than a month past, and that some person had been
concealed there. I was interested in the distress of the stranger; I
was impressed with the dignity of his character; I implicitly confided
in his assertions of innocence, and the unjust persecution that he
suffered; I was not insensible to the proposed reward, the realising of
which probably depended on his safety. But, most of all, I considered
my honour as pledged for the protection of the man who had thus cast
himself upon my fidelity, and believed that I should be everlastingly
disgraced if he suffered any evil through treachery or neglect on my
part. I therefore answered confidently to the officers that they were
misinformed, and offered to conduct them over every part of my house
and demesnes, that they might satisfy themselves by inspection that
there was no person concealed any where within my possessions. I should
have been better pleased, openly to have defied their interrogatories,
and to have asked them whether, allowing their suspicions to be just,
they were entitled to believe that I was such a villain as to betray a
man who had thrown himself upon my generosity? But though this conduct
would have had a greater appearance of gallantry, I believed it would
have less of the reality, as it would have strengthened their idea of
my participation, and increased the danger of the person I was bound to
protect.

They accepted my offer of submitting to their search, and made a strict
examination of every place about my habitation in which the stranger
could be concealed. Disappointed here, they endeavoured by threats to
discover whether I was able to give them any information. To these I
calmly answered, that they had mistaken my character; that, though I
was a poor man, I had not forgotten that I was noble; that they were
already in possession of my spontaneous answer to their enquiries;
and that, in no case, and upon no supposition, should tyranny and
ill treatment extort from me what I was not in the first instance
disposed to give. My wife was present during this conversation, and, I
could perceive, felt an alarm for my danger that she would have been
incapable of feeling for a danger to herself.

Though I was extremely anxious that these men should be disappointed in
the object of their expedition, yet I did not neglect this opportunity
of endeavouring to obtain satisfaction for my own curiosity. I remarked
at first that the Neapolitan was an inquisitor, and this circumstance
had given additional poignancy to the uneasiness of Marguerite. But
the accusations of which the inquisition at this time took cognisance
were so numerous--the ecclesiastical power continually usurping upon
the civil--that I was little assisted in the judgment I was desirous
to frame by any inference to be deduced from this circumstance. I
questioned directly, with an air as if it were merely in the way of
conversation, what was the crime of the man of whom they were in
pursuit? and what was the cause forcible enough to induce a Neapolitan
inquisitor to follow so decrepit and forlorn an individual as he
described, beyond the Alps, and almost to the banks of the Danube? To
this he answered roughly, that though he was not able to discover the
object of his search, he was by no means convinced that I was not his
abettor and accomplice; and that as to his crime, that was not to be
named; the welfare of Christendom demanding that the criminal, and the
memory of his offences, should be buried together. At the same time he
warned me to consider well what I did, before I exposed myself to be
overwhelmed by the vengeance of the court of which he was a member. To
this I answered haughtily, that I had already condescended to repel
his suspicion, and that no other man than an inquisitor would have had
the stupidity or the audaciousness to question my veracity. I added,
that I was perfectly acquainted with the nature of his court, which was
an object of abhorrence to the whole Christian world; but that he was
mistaken if he supposed that the detestable nature of its proceedings
would enable him to practise every sort of outrage with impunity. The
officers withdrew into the little inclosure in front of my cottage, and
I overheard them consulting whether, having failed in their principal
object, they should carry me a prisoner along with them. The firmness
of my manner however had awed them, and the fearlessness I expressed
seemed to them to arise from a consciousness of innocence. They at
length departed as they came.

I watched them from my cottage as they descended to the shore, and
it was with no little pleasure that I perceived them re-embark, and
stand off for the opposite side of the lake. This spectacle for a time
entirely engaged me, and when I turned from the door I observed that
my beloved Marguerite had been in tears. She endeavoured to hide this
circumstance from my sight. I took her affectionately by the hand, and,
pressing her to my bosom, entreated her not to make herself uneasy.

“Ah, Reginald!” said she, “how can I avoid being uneasy, when I see
you exposed to this imminent danger? I thought that, in forfeiting our
fortune and our rank, and retiring to this obscure and sequestered
situation, we might at least promise ourselves the blessing of the
poor--oblivion and security; and that should have consoled me for all
I have lost. Who is this man that is thus mysteriously hidden among
us? What is the guilt from the punishment of which he thus anxiously
withdraws himself? What can be the nature of your connection with such
a man? And what will be the issue of so perilous an adventure?”

I hesitated. I knew not what to answer to so earnest an anxiety. I was
melted at the distress and the affection of Marguerite. She saw my
embarrassment, and proceeded:--

“Mistake me not, my beloved!” said she. “I have no desire to pry
into what you are willing to conceal. Forgive the perturbation which
has poured itself out in these involuntary questions. I repose an
entire confidence in you. I would sooner die than interfere with any
object you have at heart. Go on according to the dictates of your
own judgment, undisturbed by me. I will not doubt that you have
sufficient reasons for what you communicate, and what you suppress. I
am grieved indeed at the interruption of our obscure and unambitious
tranquillity; but I had resolved not to trouble you with my uneasiness
and apprehensions. The incident of this morning has extorted them from
me; but I will behave better in future.”

This scene was extremely distressing to me. My wife was oppressed with
fears, and I had nothing to answer her. The consolations that rose up
in my own mind I was prevented from communicating. The more generously
she confided in me, the more I felt the ungracious and disagreeable
nature of the concealment I practised. I endeavoured however to
encourage myself with the idea, that the labour would not be long, and
the harvest would prove abundant. I said in my own mind, The worst is
now over; the business has been commenced; the shock to my own family
has actually occurred; I must go on resolutely, and shut my eyes to the
temporarily displeasing circumstances that may be connected with the
completing my object.




CHAPTER XIII.


Another source of uneasiness was added to the distraction my mind
already endured. The stranger did not appear. It was in the morning
that the officers of justice arrived; they departed about noon; and
in two hours afterwards I entered the wood in search of my guest.
The wood was of some leagues in extent; it was intersected by paths
in various directions; it was interspersed with caverns; its growth
was of all kinds,--in some places lofty trees that seemed to form a
support for the clouds, in others an underwood impenetrable alike to
the feet and to the eye. As I entered the wood, I however conceived
that the discovery of the stranger, to me who was acquainted with its
lurking-places, would be an affair of little toil; his feebleness and
decrepitude would not suffer him to proceed to any great distance. In
this I was mistaken. I looked carefully on all sides; I examined every
recess and corner with which I was acquainted: but I found no trace of
the stranger. The scene was so complicated and involved, that even this
was a labour of considerable duration. At length I became satisfied
that he was not in the nearer division of the wood.

I paused. I felt at once that it was little less than a Herculean
task to hunt through the whole of its dimensions. It would probably
be of little use to call, and endeavour by that means to discover his
retreat. I knew of no name by which he was to be recognised; and,
if my own voice was but a slight resource to penetrate this immense
labyrinth of foliage, the voice of the stranger, weakened by age, and
now probably still more enfeebled by hunger and fatigue, could not be
expected to make itself heard. Beside which, as I knew not what the
source of information had been to the officers who had just left me, I
was unwilling to expose my guest to the danger that might arise from
this mode of seeking him. I could not even be sure, though I had seen
their boat stand off from the shore, that they might not afterwards
land one or more of their party, and be at this very moment within
ear-shot of me. I therefore proceeded in anxiety and silence.

My search was no more successful in the part of the wood with which I
was little acquainted, than in the part with which I was most familiar.
I had already been engaged four hours in the task, and night began
to come on. It shut in with heavy clouds, that on all sides appeared
deeply loaded with rain. I now began to consider my own situation; and,
by comparing circumstances, found that I was at a great distance from
my own habitation. There was no direct path by which for me to return.
I had proceeded to the right and the left, backward and forward,
sometimes by more open paths, and sometimes forcing my way through
briars and brushwood, as caprice, or the hope of effecting the object
of my search, happened to guide me. It was therefore no easy matter
to guess how I was to return, or even, now that the lowering clouds
had covered the horizon with one uniform tint, in which direction lay
the cottage or the lake. While I stood contemplating what was to
be done, I heard the howling of the wolves at a distance; and their
howl had that particular melancholy and discomfiting sound which is
well known to precede a coming storm. There was no time to be lost,
and accordingly I set out. I was less anxious to be at home on my own
account, than for the sake of quieting the alarms of my family, to whom
I had already occasioned too great a portion of uneasiness.

I had not proceeded far before the rain descended in torrents,
intermingled with peals of thunder and sheets of lightning. The
thunder, interrupted, as it were, from time to time, with the noise
of the wild beasts that inhabited the wood, deafened me, while the
excessive and instantaneous brilliancy of the lightning occasioned me
an intolerable aching in the organ of sight. It rained incessantly
for two hours, and I found myself drenched and fatigued with the
wet. During this time my progress was small; and I was ever and
anon intercepted by the underwood, and could not without repeated
experiments discover the means of proceeding. At length the rain
subsided, and seemed to give place to a gloomy and motionless calm.
Soon after, I discovered a light at a distance, and advanced towards
it. As I approached, I perceived that it proceeded from a set of
banditti, to the amount of fourteen or fifteen persons, sitting round
a fire in the mouth of a cavern. I was glad to turn my steps another
way, and was for some time afraid that the noise I made in occasionally
forcing my way through the bushes would alarm them, and cost me my
life. I however fortunately escaped their notice. This was in a part of
the wood remote from the path I ought to have taken, and near the road
to Lindau.

The day began to dawn before I reached my own habitation. The
conjecture I had made, when I was unawares upon the point of falling
into the hands of the banditti, that the road of Lindau was on
the other side of their retreat, was of some service to me as an
indication where to find the cottage and the lake. This road skirted
the wood on the side nearly opposite to that by which I entered it.
The difficulties however I had to encounter were inconceivably great,
in endeavouring to preserve my line of direction. After having been
compelled four or five times to deviate from the line, it is seldom
that a traveller will find himself right in his conjecture as to the
direction he is pursuing, unless he has some sensible object as a sort
of pole-star by which to govern his route. It happened in this instance
that I was more fortunate than I was entitled to expect. I laboured
indeed till daybreak without getting out of the labyrinth that inclosed
me. But the sun no sooner began to lend an imperfect light, than I
recognised certain objects which upon some former occasions I had
observed, and perceived that my journey was nearly at an end. I entered
my cottage, and found Marguerite alone awake and expecting me.

She had been somewhat uneasy on account of my absence, both from the
extreme tempestuousness of the night, and in consequence of the painful
sensations the events of the preceding morning had introduced,--events
with which it was almost unavoidable for her to imagine that my absence
was in some way connected. The period of my insanity in Switzerland
might indeed have accustomed her to the irregularity of my motions,
but a term of more than six years which had intervened, had produced
in her expectations and habits of a different sort. I related to this
admirable woman the adventures of the night and the fruitlessness
of the search in which I had been engaged; and this openness of
communication, unresembling the nature of the intercourse which had
lately existed between us, relieved in some degree my burthened heart,
and cheered the drooping spirits of Marguerite. She dropped some
consolatory and sadly pleasing tears; and her manner seemed to say,
though she would not suffer her tongue to give the idea words, How
sweet are cordiality and confidence! Oh! do not let our situation,
which has deprived us of many other comforts, ever again be robbed of
this comfort, which is alone worth all the rest! Though she necessarily
felt the presence of the stranger as an evil, the bane of our domestic
peace, yet it was impossible for her not to compassionate his fate, and
suffer some distress from his strange and abrupt disappearance.

After the conversation which had so eminently served as a relief to
our minds, Marguerite left me to repose myself from the extraordinary
fatigue I had undergone. But my mind was too much disturbed to suffer
me to sink into the arms of forgetfulness. I felt something tragical in
the sad destiny of my unfortunate guest. It was but too probable that,
in his peculiarly weak state of body, and with his declining health,
the being thus exposed for a day and a night to the effects of hunger,
of the inclemency of the air, and the tempestuousness of the elements,
would put a close to his existence. I was determined soon to recommence
my search. But how could I be sure that I should be more fortunate
to-day, than the day before? If I found him, it was most likely I
should find him either dead or dying. The degree of intercourse that
had taken place between us had made him occupy a considerable space
in my thoughts. The prospects he had opened to me, the conduct he had
induced me to adopt, the painful effects and dissatisfaction of mind
which had been produced by that conduct as it respected my family, all
combined to give me an interest in his fate. I had seen his talents; I
had felt his ascendancy; I had experienced that sort of conflict, which
appearances of guilt on the one hand, and asseverations of innocence
on the other, are calculated to produce in the thoughts and emotions
of a bystander. He was no common man; the expectations and conjectures
he excited were of no ordinary sort; and I felt that an army might be
destroyed, and a spacious plain covered with the wounded and the dying,
without producing greater commotion in my soul.

In the anxious and disturbed state of mind in which I was, the thoughts
flow with extraordinary rapidity. It will be found attended with a
strange, and, previously to the experiment, incredible mixture of
reasoning and passion, of philosophising and fury. I was accordingly
conscious at this moment of the truth of the stranger’s assertion,
that in me he had a protector, not a friend. Friendship is an object
of a peculiar sort; the smallest reserve is deadly to it. I may indeed
feel the emotions of a friend towards a man who in part conceals from
me the thoughts of his heart; but then I must be unconscious of this
concealment. The instant I perceive this limitation of confidence, he
drops into the class of ordinary men: a divorce is effected between us:
our hearts, which grew together, suffer amputation; the arteries are
closed; the blood is no longer mutually transfused and confounded. I
shall be conscious of all his qualities, for I stand in the place of
an impartial umpire. I consider him as a machine capable of so much
utility to myself, and so much utility to other men. But I do not
regard him as the brother of my soul: I do not feel that my life is
bound up in his: I do not feel as if, were he to die, the whole world
would be at an end to me, and that my happiness would be buried with
him for ever in the darkness of the grave. I am not conscious of those
emotions which are the most exquisite and indescribable the human mind
can experience; and which, being communicated by a sort of electrical
stroke to him who is their object, constitute the solace of all his
cares, the alleviator of all his calamities, the only nectar and truest
balm of human life. For me, he stands alone in the world, having
companions and associates, the connections, as it were, of mercantile
selfishness, or casual jollity and good humour, but no friend. It was
thus that I thought of the stranger. He obtained from me the compassion
due to a human being, and the respect extorted by his qualities, but
nothing calculated radically to disturb the equilibrium of the mind. I
looked forward to his death with unruffled thoughts and an unmoistened
eye. There was one thing indeed that shook me more deeply; the thought
of losing the promised reward, and of having exposed myself to the evil
of an unquiet and dissatisfied mind in vain.

I rested but a few hours before I set out again upon the search,
to which the interposition of the darkness of the preceding night
had put an abrupt close. I had the precaution to take with me a
slight provision of food and cordials, believing that, if I found
the stranger, he would at least be in the greatest need of something
reviving and restorative. Charles earnestly intreated to assist me in
the search, but upon this I put a peremptory prohibition. It would have
been in direct contradiction to what the stranger had most solemnly
required of me.

I had already spent several hours in anxiously tracing the wood in
every direction; and the period of noon was past, when, approaching
an obscure and almost impenetrable thicket, my ear was caught by a
low and melancholy sound, which at first I knew not to what I was to
ascribe. It however arrested my attention, and caused me to assume an
attitude of listening. After the lapse of little more than a minute,
the same sound was repeated. I now distinctly perceived that it was
the groan of some creature in a very feeble and exhausted state, and
immediately suspected that it was the stranger. I went almost round the
thicket before I could discern an entrance, and, though I looked with
the utmost care, could perceive nothing that the thicket inclosed. The
groan was repeated a third time. The long intervals between the groans
gave a peculiar melancholy to the effect, and each seemed so much lower
than the groan before, that nothing but the ear of anxious attention
would have caught it; at the same time that the tone conveyed an idea
of stupified, yet vital, anguish. At length I perceived the legs and
something of the garb of a man. It was the stranger! He appeared to
have crept into the thicket upon his hands and knees. When I forced
my way to him, he seemed in the very act of expiring. He was lying on
his face, and I raised him a little. His eyes were fixed; his mouth
was open; his lips and tongue were parched and dry. I infused a few
drops of a cordial into his mouth. For a moment it appeared to produce
no sensation, but presently my patient uttered a deep and long-drawn
sigh. I repeated my application. As a principal cause of the condition
in which I found him was inanition, the stimulant I administered
produced a powerful effect. He moved his hands, shuddered, turned his
eyes languidly upon me, and, having appeared to recognise me, shut
them hastily again. I moved him slowly and softly into a freer air,
and bathed his temples with one of the liquids I had about me. By this
time he looked up, and then suddenly round him with a wild and hurried
air. He spoke not however; he was speechless. In about a quarter of
an hour he relapsed into convulsions, in which it seemed probable he
would expire. They lasted a considerable time, and he then sunk into
a state of insensibility. I thought he was dead. Thus circumstanced,
it was some relief to my humanity to have found him yet alive, and to
have received his parting breath. But in a moment his secret and his
promises recurred to me with inexpressible anguish, and I inwardly
reproached him for having deferred his communication so long, as now
to preclude its ever being made. I cannot describe the keenness, the
burning and intolerable bitterness, of my sensation. Keen it may well
be supposed to have been, from its having so instantaneously and
forcibly recurred at a time when other objects seemed to press upon my
senses. No one who has not felt what it is to fall in a moment from
hope, or, as I should rather say, from assured possession of what his
soul most loved and desired, into black and interminable despair, can
imagine what was then the state of my mind. The body of my patient
slided from my nerveless arms; I lifted up the eyes of rage and
phrensy, as if to curse the Author of my being; and then fell helpless
and immoveable by the side of the stranger.

I felt him move; I heard him sigh. I lifted up my head, and perceived
stronger marks of life and sense about him than had yet displayed
themselves. I threw my arms about him; I pressed him to my heart. The
emphatical gesture I used seemed to have a sort of magnetical force
to rouse his dying powers. With a little assistance from me he sat
upright. My assiduity produced wonders: it fortunately happened that
this thicket was but a half a mile from my habitation, and indeed was
one of the spots which I had searched without success the day before.
About the hour of sunset, partly by leading, and partly by supporting
him, I restored my guest to his former apartment.

He remained speechless, or nearly so. He vented his sensations in
sighs, in inward and inarticulate sounds; and even when he arrived
at the power of making himself understood by words, it was only by
monosyllables and half sentences that he conveyed to me his meaning.
I now gave up my time almost entirely to an assiduous attendance on
the stranger. Every day I expected to be his last; every day was more
or less interspersed with symptoms that seemed to menace his instant
dissolution. During all this time I remained in the anxious suspense
of contending hope and fear. Was it probable that he would ever
recover strength enough to confer on me the legacy he had announced?
The particulars of his secret I knew not; but, judging from what I
had heard of the pretences and pursuits of alchemy, it was natural to
suppose that he had a process to communicate, which would require on
his part considerable accuracy of recollection, as well as the power of
delivering himself in a methodical and orderly discourse.

I was fortunate enough however to perceive, after a tormenting and
tedious crisis, that he appeared to be in a progress of convalescence,
and that his strength both of body and mind were recruited daily. After
the lapse of a fortnight from the adventure of the wood, he one evening
addressed me in the following manner:--

“St. Leon, I have been to blame. I have put you to a sufficient
trial; I have received from you every assistance and kindness that my
situation demanded; I have imposed on you much trouble and anxiety; I
have excited your expectations by announcing to you in part what it
was in my power to bestow; and I have finally risked the defrauding
your hopes and your humanity of their just reward. Do me the justice
however to remember, that I had no presentiment of the event which has
so inauspiciously come between you and your hopes. Fool that I was, I
imagined I had suffered enough, and that, as I had obtained a longer
respite from external persecution than I almost ever experienced,
I should be permitted to spend the short remainder of my days
uninterrupted! I now however look back upon this last assault with
complacency. It has cut off something from the last remnant of a life
to the close of which I look forward with inexpressible longing; at
the same time that I am still in prospect of obtaining the final wish
of my heart--the stealing out of the world unperceived, and thus in
some measure eluding the last malice of my enemies. After my death I
have but one injunction to leave with you--the injunction of Hercules
to Philoctetes--that no inducement may move you to betray to mortal
man the place in which you shall have deposited my ashes. Bury them
in a spot which I will describe to you: it is not far, and is only
recommended to me by its almost inaccessible situation: and that once
done, speak of me and, if possible, think of me no more. Never on any
account mention me or allude to me; never describe me, or relate the
manner of our meeting, or the adventure which has at length brought on
the desired close of my existence.

“Believe me, in the feeble and helpless condition in which I have spent
the last fortnight, your wishes and expectations have been uppermost
in my mind, and there is nothing I have felt with so much compunction
as the danger of leaving them unsatisfied. To you perhaps I at present
appear to be rapidly recovering, I feel the dart of death in my vitals;
I know I shall not live four days. It is necessary therefore that I
should finish without delay all that remains for me to finish. I will
devote this night to the arranging my thoughts and putting in order
what I have to communicate, that no mistake or omission may have part
in a transaction so important. Come to me to-morrow morning; I will be
prepared for you.”

As soon as I heard this discourse, and provided the stranger with every
thing he could want during the night, I withdrew. My heart was big
with expectation; my thoughts all night were wild and tumultuous. When
the hour of assignation arrived, I hastened along the garden to the
summer-house, conscious that upon that hour depended all the colour of
my future life. Since the stranger had been in his present dangerous
condition, the door was not bolted; it was only locked: the key was
in my possession, and remained night and day attached to my person. I
opened the door; I panted and was breathless.

I immediately saw that the stranger had undergone some great alteration
for the worse. He had suffered a sort of paralytic affection. He lifted
up his face as I entered; it was paler than I had ever seen it. He
shook his head mournfully, and intimated by signs the disappointment
which this morning must witness. He was speechless. “Fate! fate!”
exclaimed I in an agony of despair, “am I to be for ever baffled? Is
the prize so much longed for and so ardently expected at last to escape
me?”--It is not to be imagined how much these successive, endless
disappointments increased my impatience, and magnified in my eyes the
donation I sought.

The whole of this and the following day the stranger remained
speechless. The third day, in the morning, he murmured many sounds,
but in a manner so excessively inarticulate, that I was not able to
understand one word in six that he said. I recollected his prediction
that he should die on the fourth day. The fever of my soul was at its
height. Mortal sinews and fibres could sustain no more. If the stranger
had died thus, it is most probable that I should have thrown myself in
anguish and rage upon his corpse, and have expired in the same hour.

In the evening of the third day I visited him again. He had thrown his
robe around him, and was sitting on the side of his couch. The evening
sun shot his last beams over the window-shutters. There were about
eight inches between the shutter and the top of the window; and some
branches of vines, with their grapes already ripe, broke the uniformity
of the light. The side of the couch faced the west, and the beams
played upon the old man’s countenance. I had never seen it so serene.
The light, already softened by the decline of day, gave it a peculiar
animation: and a smile that seemed to betoken renovation and the youth
of angels sat upon it. He beckoned me to approach. I placed myself
beside him on the couch; he took my hand in his, and leaned his face
towards me.

“I shall never witness the light of the setting sun again!” were the
first words he uttered. I immediately perceived that he spoke more
collectedly, and with better articulation than at any time since the
paralytic stroke. Still however it was no easy matter to develop his
words. But I wound up every faculty of my frame to catch them; and,
assisted as I was by the habit of listening to his speech for many
weeks, which during the whole of that time had never been distinct, I
was successful enough to make out his entire discourse.

It continued, though with various interruptions, for more than half an
hour. He explained with wonderful accuracy the whole of his secrets,
and the process with which they were connected. My soul was roused to
the utmost stretch of attention and astonishment. His secrets, as I
have already announced in the commencement of this history, consisted
of two principal particulars; the art of multiplying gold, and the
power of living for ever. The detail of these secrets I omit; into
that I am forbidden to enter. My design in writing this narrative, I
have said, is not to teach the art of which I am in possession, but to
describe the adventures it produced to me.

The more I listened, the more my astonishment grew. I looked at the
old man before me; I observed the wretchedness of his appearance, the
meanness of his attire, his apparent old age, his extreme feebleness,
the characters of approaching death that were written on his
countenance. After what I had just heard, I surveyed these things with
a sensation of novelty, as if I had never remarked them in him before.
I said to myself, Is this the man that possesses mines of wealth
inexhaustible, and the capacity of living for ever?

Observing that he had finished his discourse, I addressed to him these
words, by a sort of uncontrollable impulse, and with all the vehemence
of unsated and insuppressible curiosity.

“Tell me, I adjure you by the living God, what use have you made of
these extraordinary gifts? and with what events has that use been
attended?”

As I spoke thus, the countenance of the old man underwent a surprising
change. Its serenity vanished; his eyes rolled with an expression of
agony; and he answered me thus:--

“Be silent, St. Leon! How often must I tell you that no single
incident of my story shall ever be repeated! Have I no claim upon your
forbearance? Can you be barbarous and inhuman enough to disturb my last
scene with these bitter recollections?”--I was silent.

This is all that is material that passed at our interview.

The stranger died the next day, and was buried according to his
instructions.




CHAPTER XIV.


From the moment of my last interview with the stranger I was another
creature. My thoughts incessantly rolled upon his communications. They
filled me with astonishment and joy, almost to bursting. I was unable
to contain myself; I was unable to remain in any posture or any place.
I could scarcely command myself sufficiently to perform the last duties
to his body in the manner he had directed. I paced with eager step the
sands of the lake; I climbed the neighbouring hills, and then descended
with inconceivable rapidity to the vales below; I traced with fierce
impatience the endless mazes of the wood in which I so hardly recovered
my bewildered guest. The uninterruptedness and celerity of bodily
motion seemed to communicate some ease to my swelling heart.

Yet there was one thing I wanted. I wanted some friendly bosom into
which to pour out my feelings, and thus by participation to render my
transports balsamic and tolerable. But this was for ever denied me. No
human ear must ever be astonished with the story of my endowments and
my privileges. I may whisper it to the woods and the waters, but not
in the face of man. Not only am I bound to suppress the knowledge of
the important secret I possess, but even the feelings, the ruminations,
the visions, that are for ever floating in my soul. It is but a vain
and frivolous distinction upon which I act, when I commit to this
paper my history, and not the science which is its corner-stone. The
reason why the science may not be divulged is obvious. Exhaustless
wealth, if communicated to all men, would be but an exhaustless heap
of pebbles and dust; and nature will not admit her everlasting laws
to be so abrogated, as they would be by rendering the whole race of
sublunary man immortal. But I am bound, as far as possible, not only
to hide my secrets, but to conceal that I have any to hide. Senseless
paper! be thou at least my confidant! To thee I may impart what my soul
spurns the task to suppress. The human mind insatiably thirsts for a
confidant and a friend. It is no matter that these pages shall never he
surveyed by other eyes than mine. They afford at least the semblance of
communication and the unburthening of the mind; and I will press the
illusion fondly and for ever to my heart.

To return to the explanation of my feelings immediately after receiving
possession of my grand acquisition; for, without that explanation,
the spirit and meaning of my subsequent narrative will scarcely be
sufficiently apprehended.

“Happy, happy, happy man!” exclaimed I, in the midst of my wanderings
and reveries. “Wealth! thy power Is unbounded and inconceivable. All
men bow down to thee; the most stubborn will is by thee rendered pliant
as wax; all obstacles are melted down and dissolved by the ardour of
thy beams! The man that possesses thee, finds every path level before
him, and every creature burning to anticipate his wishes: but if these
are the advantages that wealth imparts to such as possess only those
scanty portions which states and nations allow to the richest, how
enviable must his condition be, whose wealth is literally exhaustless
and infinite! He possesses really the blessing, which priestcraft and
superstition have lyingly pronounced upon the charitable: he may give
away the revenues of princes, and not be the poorer. He possesses the
attribute which we are accustomed to ascribe to the Creator of the
universe: he may say to a man, ‘Be rich,’ and he is rich. He can bestow
with equal facility the smallest gifts and the greatest. Palaces, as
if they were the native exhalations of the soil, rise out of the earth
at his bidding. He holds the fate of nations and of the world in his
hand. He can remove forests, and level mountains, drain marshes, extend
canals, turn the course of rivers, and shut up the sea with doors. He
can assign to every individual in a nation the task he pleases, can
improve agriculture, and establish manufactures, can found schools,
and hospitals, and infirmaries, and universities. He can study the
genius of every man, and enable every man to pursue the bent of his
mind. Poets and philosophers will be fostered, the sublimest flights of
genius be produced, and the most admirable discoveries effected, under
his auspicious patronage. The whole world are his servants, and he,
if his temper be noble and upright, will be the servant of the whole
world. Nay, it cannot happen otherwise. He has as few temptations to
obliquity as omnipotence itself. Weakness and want are the parents of
vice. But he possesses every thing; he cannot better his situation; no
man can come into rivalship or competition with him. I thank God, I
have known the extremes of poverty, and therefore am properly qualified
to enjoy my present happiness. I have felt a reverse of fortune,
driving me in one instance to insanity, in another instance threatening
to destroy me, my wife, and children together, with the plague of
hunger. My heart has been racked with never-dying remorse; because, by
my guilt and folly, my children have been deprived of the distinction
and rank to which they were born, and plunged in remediless obscurity.
Heaven has seen my sufferings, and at length has graciously said, ‘It
is enough.’ Because I have endured more than man ever endured from
the privation of fortune, God in his justice has reserved for me this
secret of the transmutation of metals. I can never again fall into that
wretchedness, by which my understanding was subverted, and my heart was
broken.”

From this part of the legacy of the stranger, my mind reverted to the
other. I surveyed my limbs, all the joints and articulations of my
frame, with curiosity and astonishment. “What!” exclaimed I, “these
limbs, this complicated but brittle frame, shall last for ever! No
disease shall attack it; no pain shall seize it; death shall withhold
from it for ever his abhorred grasp! Perpetual vigour, perpetual
activity, perpetual youth, shall take up their abode with me! Time
shall generate in me no decay, shall not add a wrinkle to my brow,
or convert a hair of my head to grey! This body was formed to die;
this edifice to crumble into dust; the principles of corruption and
mortality are mixed up in every atom of my frame. But for me the laws
of nature are suspended; the eternal wheels of the universe roll
backward; I am destined to be triumphant over fate and time!

“Months, years, cycles, centuries! To me all these are but as
indivisible moments. I shall never become old; I shall always be,
as it were, in the porch and infancy of existence; no lapse of years
shall subtract any thing from my future duration. I was born under
Louis the Twelfth; the life of Francis the First now threatens a speedy
termination; he will be gathered to his fathers, and Henry his son will
succeed him. But what are princes and kings and generations of men to
me? I shall become familiar with the rise and fall of empires; in a
little while the very name of France, my country, will perish from the
face of the earth, and men will dispute about the situation of Paris,
as they dispute about the site of ancient Nineveh and Babylon and Troy.
Yet I shall still be young. I shall take my most distant posterity
by the hand; I shall accompany them in their career; and, when they
are worn out and exhausted, shall shut up the tomb over them, and set
forward.”

There was something however in this part of my speculation that
did not entirely please me. Methought the race of mankind looked
too insignificant in my eyes. I felt a degree of uneasiness at the
immeasurable distance that was put between me and the rest of my
species. I found myself alone in the world. Must I for ever live
without a companion, a friend, any one with whom I can associate upon
equal terms, with whom I can have a community of sensations, and
feelings, and hopes, and desires, and fears? I experienced something,
less than a wish, yet a something very capable of damping my joy, that
I also were subject to mortality. I could have been well content to be
partaker with a race of immortals, but I was not satisfied to be single
in this respect. I was not pleased to recollect how trivial would
appear to me those concerns of a few years, about which the passions of
men are so eagerly occupied. I did not like the deadness of heart that
seemed to threaten me. I began to be afraid of vacancy and torpor, and
that my life would become too uniformly quiet. Nor did it sufficiently
console me to recollect that, as one set of friends died off the stage,
another race would arise to be substituted in their stead. I felt that
human affections and passions are not made of this transferable stuff,
and that we can love nothing truly, unless, we devote ourselves to it
heart and soul, and our life is, as it, were, bound up in the object of
our attachment.

It was worse when I recollected my wife and my children. When I
considered for the first time that they were now in a manner nothing to
me, I felt a sensation that might be said to mount to anguish. How can
a man attach himself to any thing, when he comes to consider it as the
mere plaything and amusement of the moment! In this statement however I
am not accurate. Habit is more potent than any theoretical speculation.
Past times had attached me deeply, irrevocably, to all the members of
my family. But I felt that I should survive them all. They would die
one by one, and leave me alone. I should drop into their graves the
still renewing tear of anguish. In that tomb would my heart be buried.
Never, never, through the countless ages of eternity, should I form
another attachment. In the happy age of delusion, happy and auspicious
at least to the cultivation of the passions, when I felt that I also
was a mortal, I was capable of a community of sentiments and a going
forth of the heart. But how could I, an immortal, hope ever hereafter
to feel a serious, an elevating and expansive passion for the ephemeron
of an hour!

As the first tumult of my thoughts subsided, I began, as is usual
with persons whose minds are turned loose in the search of visionary
happiness, to picture to myself, more steadily and with greater
minuteness, the objects I would resolve early to accomplish. I would in
the first place return to France, my adored country, the residence of
my ancestors, whose annals they had adorned, whose plains had witnessed
their heroic feats, and whose earth enclosed their ashes. To France I
was endeared by every tie that binds the human heart; her language had
been the prattle of my infancy; her national manners and temper were
twined with the fibres of my constitution, and could not be rooted
out; I felt that every Frenchman that lived was my brother. Banishment
had only caused these prejudices to strike their tendrils deeper in my
heart. I knew not that I should finally limit my abode to France. A
man who, like Melchisedec, is “without end of life,” may well consider
himself as being also, like him, “without father, without mother, and
without descent.” But at all events I would first fix my children, who
did not participate in my privileges, in their native soil. I would
reside there myself, at least till they were fully disposed of, and
till the admirable partner of the last seventeen years of my life had
resigned her breath. I would immediately repurchase the property of my
ancestors, which had been so distressfully resigned. The exile should
return from his seven years’ banishment in triumph and splendour. I
would return to the court of my old patron and friend, the gallant
Francis, and present to him my boy, the future representative of my
family, now one year older than I had been at the field of the Cloth of
Gold. Though an exile from my country, I had not been an inattentive
witness of her fortunes. The year fifteen hundred and forty-four
was a remarkable and interesting year in the history of France. The
endless animosities of Francis and the emperor had broken out with
new fury about two years before. In the spring of the present year,
the count d’Anguien had won a battle in Piedmont[8], in which ten
thousand imperialists were left dead upon the field, and which might
be considered as having at length effaced the defeat of Pavia, in the
same part of the world nineteen years before. The moment it had been
announced that a battle was resolved on, the young nobility of France,
with their characteristic ardour, had hurried to the scene, and the
court of Paris was, in an instant as it were, turned into a desert.
On the other hand, the emperor and the king of England had concerted
for the same season a formidable plan of attack against our northern
frontier. With an army of twenty-five thousand men respectively, the
one on the side of Champagne, and the other of Picardy, they agreed
to advance directly into the heart of the kingdom, and to unite their
forces in the neighbourhood of Paris. The last intelligence that had
reached me was, that Château Thierry, about twenty leagues from the
metropolis, was in the hands of the emperor, and that the inhabitants
of the capital, filled with consternation, were seeking their safety
by flight in every direction. These circumstances had passed idly by
me, and left little impression, so long as I considered myself as an
obscure peasant cut off for ever from the bosom of my country. But,
vested with the extraordinary powers now intrusted to me, the case was
altered. I felt even a greater interest in my sovereign, now pressed
down with disease and calamity, yet retaining the original alacrity
and confidence of his soul, than I had done, when I saw him in all the
pride of youth, and all the splendour of prosperity. I was anxious that
Charles should now enter into his service; and I determined once again
to assume the cuirass and the falchion, that I might be the instructor
of his youth, and his pattern in feats of war. I resolved that my
shepherd-boy, bred in obscurity among woods and mountains, should burst
with sudden splendour upon his countrymen, and prove in the field
his noble blood and generous strain. I also proposed to myself, both
out of sympathy for my king, and to give greater éclat to my son’s
entrance into life, to replenish with my treasures the empty coffers of
France, and thus to furnish what at this period seemed to be the main
spring upon which the fortune of war depended. With the advantages I
could afford him, the career of Charles could not fail to be rapid and
illustrious, and he would undoubtedly obtain the staff of constable
of France, the possessor of which, Montmorency, was now in disgrace.
I would marry my daughters to such of the young nobility as I should
find most distinguished in talents and spotless in character. When, by
the death of her I most loved, my affections should be weaned from my
country, and the scenes to which I had been accustomed were rendered
painful and distressing, I would then set out upon my travels. I would
travel with such splendour and profusion of expense (for this, though
mortified in me by a reverse of many years’ duration, continued to be
the foible of my heart) as should supersede the necessity of letters
of recommendation, and secure me a favourable reception wherever I
appeared. I might spend a life, in a manner, in every country that was
fortunate enough to allure my stay, spreading improvements, dispensing
blessings, and causing all distress and calamity to vanish from before
me.




CHAPTER XV.


My mind was occupied in these and similar reveries for several weeks
after the death of the stranger. My wife and children had hoped,
after that event, that I should have returned to the habits which had
pervaded the last six years of my existence, and which they had felt so
eminently productive of gratification and delight. In this hope they
found themselves deceived. My domestic character was, for the present
at least, wholly destroyed. I had a subject of contemplation that did
not admit of a partaker, and from this subject I could not withdraw
my thoughts, so much as for an instant. I had no pleasure but in that
retirement, where I could be unseen and unheard by any human eye or
ear. If at any time I was compelled to join the domestic circle, I
despatched the occasion that brought me there as speedily as possible;
and even while I remained in it, was silent and absent, engrossed with
my own contemplations, and heedless and unobservant of every thing
around me.

My abstraction was not however so entire as to prevent me from
sometimes stealing, in a sort of momentary interregnum of thought, in
that pause where the mind rests upon the chain already passed over,
and seems passively to wait for the sequel, a glance at my family. I
looked at them without knowing what it was that I did, and without
the intention to notice what I saw. Yet, even in this state of mental
abstraction, visible objects will sometimes succeed in making their
impression. I perceived that my wife and children suffered from my
behaviour. I remarked a general air of disconsolateness, and a mild
unexpostulating submission, to what nevertheless the heart deeply
deplored. They did not presume to interrupt me; they did not by prying
and inquisitive speeches attempt to extort from me the secret of the
alteration they saw; but it was manifest they conceived some great and
radical calamity had poisoned the heart of our domestic joy.

It was these symptoms thus remarked by me, that first roused me from
the inebriation of my new condition. I was compelled to suspect that,
while I revelled in visions of future enjoyment, I was inflicting
severe and unmerited pains on those I loved. It was necessary, if
I valued their happiness, that I should descend from the clouds of
speculation and fancy, and enter upon the world of realities.

But here I first found a difficulty to which, during the reign of my
intoxication, I had been utterly insensible. I was rich; I could raise
my family, as far as the power of money extended,--money, which may
in some sense be styled the empress of the world,--to what heights I
pleased. I had hitherto committed the fault, so common to projectors,
of looking only to ultimate objects and great resting places, and
neglecting to consider the steps between. This was an omission of high
importance. Every thing in the world is conducted by gradual process.
This seems to be the great principle of harmony in the universe.
Nothing is abrupt; one thing is so blended and softened into another,
that it is impossible to say where the former ends and the latter
begins.

This remark is fully applicable to the situation which was now
before me. Yesterday I was poor; to-day I was possessor of treasures
inexhaustible. How was this alteration to be announced? To dissipate
the revenues of princes, to purchase immense estates, to launch into
costly establishments, are tasks to which the most vulgar mind is
equal. But no man stands alone in the world, without all trace of
what he has been, and with no one near, that thinks himself entitled
to scrutinise his proceedings and his condition. Least of all was
this my case. I was bound to certain other persons by the most sacred
obligations; I could not separate myself from them; I could not render
myself a mere enigma in their eyes; though, in the language of the
world, the head of my family, they were my natural censors and judges.
I was accountable to them for my conduct; it was my duty, paramount to
all other duties, to stand as a fair, upright, and honourable character
in their estimation.

If these remarks be true taken in a general view, they are much more so
when applied to my particular case. There are men who live in the midst
of their families like an eastern despot surrounded with his subjects.
They are something too sacred to be approached; their conduct is not
to be reasoned upon; the amount of their receipts and disbursements is
not to be inspected; their resources are unknown; no one must say to
them, What dost thou? or, why hast thou thus conducted thyself? Even
these persons will not escape the tax to which all men are liable.
They cannot kill the general spirit of enquiry; the mystery in which
they wrap themselves will often serve as an additional stimulus; they
will finally encounter the judgment and verdict of all. For myself,
I had lived in the midst of my family upon a system of paternal and
amicable commerce. I had suffered too deeply from a momentary season
of separation and mystery, not to have been induced to renounce it
decisively and for ever.

Firm, however, as I had imagined my renunciation to have been, I was
now thrown back upon what I had most avoided. I had a secret source
of advantage, the effects of which were to be participated by those I
loved, while the spring was to remain for ever unknown. What I most
sought upon this occasion, was, that my family should share my good
fortune, and at the same time be prevented from so much as suspecting
that there was any thing mysterious connected with it. To effect
this, I presently conceived that it would be necessary to sacrifice
the sudden and instantaneous prosperity I had proposed to myself,
and introduce the reverse of our condition by slow, and, as far as
possible, insensible degrees.

One thing on which I determined, preparatory to the other measures
I had in view, was to remove from my present habitation, and take
up my residence for a time in the city of Constance. In the cottage
of the mountains it was impossible to make any material alteration
in my establishment. My property was of the narrowest extent; nor
would it be easily practicable in a country, the inhabitants of
which were accustomed to a humble allotment, considerably to enlarge
it. My house was frugal, if not mean; and, unless it were first
pulled down and built over again, the idea of introducing servants,
equipage, or splendour into it, would be absurd. My design was not
to make a long abode where I now was; but, as soon as my family
should be sufficiently prepared for the transition, to return to my
native country. I believed in the mean time, that, in the capital
of the bishopric, where my name was scarcely remembered by a single
individual, I should be more at liberty to proceed as circumstances
suggested, than in my present rural situation, where every neighbour
regarded himself as vested with a sort of inquisitorial power over all
around him.

To account for this measure to my family, I felt it incumbent on me
to confess to them a certain pecuniary acquisition. The story that
most readily suggested itself, was that of the stranger having left
behind him a certain sum of which he made a donation to me. This,
though in the plain and direct sense of the terms it were false, yet
in its spirit bore a certain resemblance to the truth; and, with that
resemblance, in spite of the rigid adherence to veracity, that first
ornament of a gentleman, that most essential prerequisite to the
regard and affection of others, which I had hitherto maintained, I was
induced to content myself. What could I do? I was compelled to account
for appearances; I was forbidden by the most solemn injunctions to
unfold the truth. I should indeed have felt little complacence in the
disclosure; I should have been reluctant to announce a circumstance
which, as I began to feel, introduced a permanent difference and
separation between me and my family.

The sum at which I fixed the legacy of the stranger was three thousand
crowns. I was not inattentive to the future; I should have been glad,
by my present account, to have furnished a more ample solution for
circumstances which might occur hereafter. But some regard was due
to probability. An unknown, a solitary man, broken with age, who
arrived on foot, and who declined all aid and attendance, must not be
represented as possessing mines of treasure.

It was some time before I could prevail on myself to break my story to
the inhabitants of my cottage. As the time approached when I was to
bid an everlasting farewell to rural obscurity and a humble station,
they seemed to adorn themselves in new charms. I was like the son of a
king, who had hitherto been told by his attendants that he was a mere
villager, and who, while his youthful imagination is dazzled by the
splendour that awaits him, yet looks back with a wistful eye upon his
mirthful sports, his former companions, and the simple charms of her
who first obtained his guileless love. I announced my acquisition and
my purpose with a faltering tongue and a beating heart.

I could perceive that my tale produced few emotions of pleasure in
those who heard it. Julia and her mother, especially, were warmly
attached to their retirement; and the scenes which had witnessed
so many pleasurable incidents and emotions. Chagrin, in spite of
themselves, made a transient abode upon their countenances; but the
unresisting mildness of the one, and the considerate attachment of the
other, prevented, for the present, their sensations from breaking out
into words. The feelings, however, that they consigned to silence, did
not entirely escape the notice of the lively little Marguerite. She
sympathised with them, probably without being aware that they were
sad. She came towards me, and, with much anxiety in her enquiring
face, asked why we must go away from the cottage? If I had got some
money I might go to the town, and buy sweetmeats, and ribands, and new
clothes, and a hundred more pretty things, and bring them home. For
her part, she should be better pleased to put on her finery, and make
her feast in the pretty old summer-house, now she was again permitted
to go and play in it, than in a palace all stuck over with emeralds
and rubies. Her mother wiped away a tear at the innocent speech of her
darling, kissed her, and bid her go and feed the hen and her chickens.
Charles was the only one in whom I could observe any pleasure at
my intelligence. He was not as yet skilful enough to calculate the
advantages that three thousand crowns could purchase. But I could see
joy sparkle in his eyes, as I announced my intention of bidding adieu
to retirement, and taking up my rest in the capital of the district.
His veins swelled with the blood of his ancestors; his mind was inured
to the contemplation of their prowess. Already sixteen years of age,
he had secretly burned to go forth into the world, to behold the
manners of his species, and to establish for himself a claim to some
rank in their estimation. He had pined in thought at the mediocrity
of our circumstances, and the apparent impossibility of emerging; for
he regarded the duty of contributing his labour to the subsistence of
the family, as the first of all obligations; and the more the bent of
his spirit struggled against it, the more resolutely he set himself to
comply.

The rest of the family were no sooner retired, than Marguerite, finding
in what I had just announced to all, an occasion from the use of which
she could not excuse herself, took this opportunity of unburthening the
grief which had long been accumulating in her mind.

“St. Leon,” said she, “listen kindly to what I am going to say to
you, and assure yourself that I am actuated by no spleen, resentment,
or ill-humour, but by the truest affection. I perceive I have lost,
in your apprehension, the right of advising you. I am no longer
the partner of your counsels; I am no longer the confident of your
thoughts. You communicate nothing but what you cannot suppress; and
that you communicate to your whole family assembled. Heaven knows how
dear to me is every individual of that family! but my love for them
does not hide from me what is due to myself. I know that a husband, who
felt as a husband ought, and, give me leave to say, as I have deserved
you should feel towards me, could not act as you have acted to-night.

“You must excuse my reminding you of some things which you seem to have
forgotten. I would not mention them, if they had not been forgotten
when they ought to have been remembered. I have lived seventeen years
with you; my whole study had been your advantage and pleasure. Have
you any thing to reproach me with? Point out to me, if in any thing I
could have added to your pleasure, and have neglected it! What I have
done, has not been the ceremonious discharge of a duty; it has been
the pure emanation of an attachment that knew no bounds. I have passed
with you through good fortune and ill fortune. When we were rich, I
entered with my whole heart into your pleasures, because they were
yours. When we were poor, I endured every hardship without a murmur; I
watched by you, I consoled you, I reconciled you to yourself. I do not
mean to make a merit of all this: no! Reginald! I could not have acted
otherwise if I would.

“Do me the justice to recollect, that I have not been a complaining or
irritable companion. In all our adversities, in the loss of fortune,
and the bitter consequences of that loss, I never uttered a reproachful
word. What poverty, sorrow, hunger and famine never extorted from me,
you have at length wrung from my bleeding heart. St. Leon! I have known
your bosom-thoughts. In no former instance has your affection or your
confidence been alienated from me; and that consoled me for all the
rest. But now, for three months, the case has been entirely altered.
You have during all that time been busy, pensive, and agitated; but I
have been as much a stranger to your meditations as if I had never been
accustomed to be their depository. You have not scrupled to inflict a
wound upon me that no subsequent change will ever be able to cicatrise.
Nor indeed do I see any likelihood of a change. You announce our
removal to Constance; what we are to do next, with what views, or for
what purpose, I am ignorant.

“I have made my election. My heart is formed for affection, and must
always feel an uneasy void and desolation without it. If you had thus
robbed me of your attachment in an early period of our intercourse, I
know not upon what extremity my disappointment and anguish might have
driven me. They are harder to bear now; but I submit. It is too late
either for relief or remedy. What remains of my powers and my strength
I owe to my children. I will not seduce them from their father. They
may be benefited by his purse or his understanding, though, like me,
they should be deprived of his affection. You may be their friend when
I am no more. I feel that this will not last long. I feel that the main
link that bound me to existence cannot be snapped, and thus snapped by
unkindness worse than death, without promising soon to put a period to
my miseries. I shall be your victim in death, after having devoted my
life to you, in a way in which few women were ever devoted to their
husbands.

“But this is not what I purposed chiefly to say. This is what my
situation and my feelings have unwillingly wrung from me. Though you
have injured me in the tenderest point, I still recollect what you
were to me. I still feel deeply interested in your welfare, and the
fair fame you are to transmit to your children. I entreat you then to
reflect deeply, before you proceed further. You seem to me to stand
upon a precipice; nor do the alteration that has taken place in your
manners, and the revolution of your heart, lead me to augur favourably
of the plans you have formed. What is this stranger? Whence came he?
Why did he hide himself, and why was he pursued by the officers of
justice? Had he no relations? Was his bequest of the sum he had about
him his own act, and who is the witness to its deliberateness or its
freedom? You must not think that the world is inattentive to the
actions of men or their circumstances; if it were, the fame we prize
would be an empty bauble. No, sir, a fair fame can only be secured by
unequivocal proceedings. What will, what can, be thought of your giving
shelter to an unknown, a man accused of crimes, a man never beheld even
by an individual of your own family, and upon the strength of whose
alleged bequest you are about to change the whole mode of your life?

“Nor, Reginald, must you think me credulous enough to imagine that
you have now disclosed the whole or the precise truth. Three thousand
crowns is not a sum sufficient to account for what you propose, for
the long agitation of your thoughts, or for the change of character
you have sustained. You must either be totally deprived of rational
judgment, or there must be something behind, that you have not
communicated. What do you purpose in going to reside in the midst of a
city foreign to the manners of a Frenchman, distracted with internal
broils, and embittered to us by the recollection of the extremities
we personally suffered in it? Is your ambition sunk so low, that it
can be gratified by such a transition? No; you mean more than you
have announced; you mean something you are unwilling to declare.
Consider that meaning well! Put me out of the question! I am nothing,
and no longer desire to be any thing. But do not involve yourself in
indelible disgrace, or entail upon your memory the curses of your
children!”

What a distress was mine, who, in return to so generous and noble an
expostulation, could impart no confidence, and indulge no sincerity!
I felt a misery, of which, till this hour, I had been unable to form
a conception. Fool that I was, I had imagined that, when endowed with
the bequests of the stranger, no further evil could approach me! I had,
in my visionary mood, created castles and palaces, and expatiated in
the most distant futurity! and here I was, stopped and disappointed at
the threshold, in the very first step of my proceedings. What I could
however I did; I poured forth to Marguerite, not the secrets of my
understanding, but the overpowering emotions of my soul.

“Best, most adorable of women!” cried I, “how you rend my heart with
the nobleness of your remonstrances! Never was man blessed with a
partner so accomplished and exemplary as I have been! Do you think
your merits can ever be obliterated from my memory? Do you think the
feelings of gratitude and admiration can ever be weakened in my bosom,
or that the strength and singleness of my attachment can suffer decay?
Bear me witness, Heaven! I know no creature on the face of the earth
that can enter into competition with you; there is not the thing
in nature that I prize in comparison. I love you a thousand times
better than myself, and would die with joy to purchase your ease and
satisfaction. I can never repay the benefits you have conferred on me;
I can never rise to an equality with you.

“What anguish then do you inflict upon me, when you talk of becoming
the victim of my unkindness? Believe you I can endure, after having
dissipated your patrimony and drawn you with me into exile, after
having experienced from you a tenderness such as man never in any other
instance obtained from woman, to entertain the idea of embittering the
remainder of your life, and shortening your existence? I should regard
myself as the most execrable of monsters. I could not live under the
recollection of so unheard-of a guilt. If you would not have me abhor
myself and curse existence, live, confide in me, and be happy!

“Oh, Marguerite! how wretched and pitiable is my situation! Make some
allowance for me! I have a secret that I would give worlds to utter,
but dare not. Do not imagine that there is, or can be, any decay in my
affection! Confide in me! Allow to necessity, what never, never could
be the result of choice! In all things else, you shall know my inmost
heart, as you possess the boundless and unalterable affections of my
soul.”

Marguerite was somewhat, but not wholly, soothed by the earnestness of
my protestations. She saw, for the prescience of the heart is never
deceived, that a blow was given to the entireness of our affection,
from which it would never recover. She felt, for in truth and delicacy
of sentiment she was much my superior, that the reserve, in which I
persisted, and for which I deprecated excuse, might be sufficiently
consistent with a vulgar attachment, but would totally change the
nature of ours. She was aware that it related to no ordinary point,
that it formed the pole-star of my conduct, that it must present itself
afresh from day to day, and that in its operation it amounted to a
divorce of the heart. She submitted however, and endeavoured to appear
cheerful. Though she felt the worm of sorrow gnawing her vitals, she
was unwilling to occasion me an uneasiness it was in her power to
withhold. She was struck with the consistency and determination of my
resistance, and expostulated no more.

We went to Constance. We bade adieu to the scene of a six years’
happiness, such as the earth has seldom witnessed. I alone had
occasioned some imperfection in that happiness. There were times indeed
when, sitting in affectionate communion with my wife, and surrounded by
my children, my sensations had been as delicious as the state of human
existence ever had to boast. I felt my heart expand; I was conscious to
the unreserved union that subsisted among us; I felt myself identified
with all that I loved, and all for whom my heart was anxious. But the
curse entailed upon me from the earliest period to which my memory can
reach, operated even in the cottage of the lake. I was not formed to
enjoy a scene of pastoral simplicity. Ambition still haunted me; an
uneasiness, scarcely defined in its object, from time to time recurred
to my mind. If I thought I wanted nothing for myself, I deemed a career
of honour due to my children. Again, when I regarded honour as an
empty phantom, and persuaded myself that all conditions of life were
intrinsically equal, I recollected the fearful scene where hunger and
destruction had hung over us in Constance, and in imagination often
pictured to myself that scene as on the point of being renewed. The
sword of the demon, famine, seemed to my disturbed apprehension to be
suspended over us by a hair. Such had been the draught of bitterness
that occasionally detracted from this most enviable, as in retrospect I
am willing to denominate it, period of my existence.

We quitted our rural retreat, and took up our abode in a prosperous
mercantile city. I hired commodious apartments in one of the grand
squares, not far from the spot where the fairs are usually held.
Undoubtedly there was nothing in this residence very congenial to the
bent of my disposition, or the projects that fermented in my mind. I
had merely chosen it by way of interval, and to soften the transition
from what I had been, to what I purposed to be. In the multitude of
irresolute thoughts with which I laboured, the small distance of
Constance from the cottage of the lake, made me feel as if the removal
thither was one of the gentlest and most moderate measures to which I
could have recourse.

I had never been less happy and at peace with myself than I was now.
From general society and the ordinary intercourse of acquaintance
I had long been estranged, and it was in vain that I endeavoured
to return to habits of that sort. The society which the city of
Constance afforded had few charms for me. It had no pretensions to the
politeness, the elegance, the learning or the genius, an intercourse
with which had once been familiar to me. It scarcely contained within
its walls any but such as were occupied in merchandise or manufacture.
The attention of its inhabitants were divided between these objects,
and the encroachments which were making upon the ancient religion by
the Confession of Augsburg and the dogmas of Calvin. The majority of
the inhabitants were protestants; and, a few years before, they had
expelled their bishop and the canons of their cathedral. Having however
miscarried in a religious war into which they had entered, these
dignitaries had been reinstalled in their functions and emoluments. The
situation thus produced was an unnatural one; and a storm was evidently
brewing more violent than any which the city had yet sustained. The
gloomy temper and melancholy austerity of the reformers were as little
congenial to my temper, as the sordid ignorance and selfishness of the
trading spirit of the community.

I therefore lived in a state of seclusion. I endeavoured to seek
amusement in such novelties and occupations as might present
themselves to a person disengaged from the general vortex. But, if
the distinguished sphere in which I had once moved disqualified me
for taking an interest in these puerilities, the anticipations in
which I indulged of the future disqualified me still more. My domestic
scene too no longer afforded me the consolation and relief I had been
accustomed to derive from it. Marguerite exerted herself to appear
cheerful and contented; but it was an exertion. I began to fear that
the arrow of disappointment had indeed struck her to the heart. I was
anxiously occupied in considering what I was to do next. I hoped that
our next step might operate to revive her gaiety, and by additional
splendour amuse her solicitude. I began to fear that I had taken a
wrong method, and entered the career of a better fortune with too much
caution and timidity. At all events I felt that we no longer lived
together as we had done. There was no more opening of the heart between
us, no more infantine guilelessness and sincerity, no more of that
unapprehensive exposure of every thought of the soul, that adds the
purest zest to the pleasures of domestic life. We stood in awe of each
other; each was to the other in some degree an intrusive and unwelcome
spy upon what was secretly passing in the mind. There may be persons
who regard this as an evil very capable of being endured; but they must
be such as never knew the domestic joys I once experienced. The fall
from one of these conditions of life to the other was too bitter.




CHAPTER XVI.


Anxious to divert my thoughts from what I hoped was only a temporary
evil, I determined, accompanied by Charles, to make a tour of some of
the cities of Germany. Dresden was the capital to which I was most
desirous of conducting him. Maurice, duke of Saxony, who held his court
there, and who was now only twenty-three years of age, was incomparably
the most accomplished prince of the empire. Desirous as I was that my
only son should fill a distinguished career, I thought I could not
better prepare him for the theatre of his native country, than by thus
initiating him beforehand in scenes of distinction and greatness.

He was delighted with his tour. We had not proceeded many leagues from
Constance, before, indulging in the bent of my mind, I laid aside
the humbleness of our appearance, and the obscure style in which we
travelled; and having procured a numerous cavalcade of horses and
servants, I set forward with considerable magnificence. We passed
through Munich, Ratisbon, and Prague. At Munich we found the court of
the elector palatine; the diet of the empire was sitting at Ratisbon,
when we arrived at that city. Charles had been almost entirely a
stranger to every thing princely and magnificent from the time he was
nine years of age; and he was now exactly at that period of human life
when external appearances are apt to make the strongest impression.
To him every thing that occurred seemed like transportation into a
new world. The figure we made procured us, as strangers, unquestioned
admission into every circle. We mixed with princes, ourselves in garb
and figure confounded with those we saw. I had lived too much and too
long in the most splendid society, to find difficulty in resuming the
unembarrassed and courtly manners which I had for years laid aside;
and Charles might be said to see his father in a new character.
Novelty prompted his admiration; he was intoxicated with wonder. His
disposition had always led him to bold and adventurous conceptions;
nothing less than an imperious sense of duty could have restrained
him from quitting our cottage, and casting himself upon the world in
search of honour and distinction. His generous heart had beat to burst
away from the obscurity of his station; and it was with impatience
and discontent that he looked forward to the life of a swain. Yet he
knew not how to break through the obstacles that confined him. It was
therefore with transports of pleasure that he saw them vanishing as of
themselves, and the career of glory opening, as if by enchantment, to
his eager steps.

The court of Dresden was infinitely more delightful to him than the
court of Munich, or the imperial display at Ratisbon. Here Charles
saw a young prince in the flower of his age, whose talents and spirit
rendered him the universal object of attention and adoration. He
remarked, in the fire of his eyes, the vivacity of his gestures, and
the grandeur of his port, something inexpressibly different from those
princes, of whom it is necessary that their rank should be announced
to you by some extrinsic circumstance, that you may not mistake them
for a merchant’s clerk or a city magistrate. The sentiment that he
breathed, as it were instinctively, as we returned from the first time
of our seeing duke Maurice, was, “At twenty-three years of age may I,
in appearance, accomplishments, and spirit, resemble this man!”

Here I was desirous of making a longer stay than at the cities through
which we had previously passed, and of procuring for my son some
personal intercourse with this great ornament of the age. I judged
this to be the more easy, as, in our first visit to the palace, I had
perceived some French noblemen of the Protestant persuasion, who had
resorted to the duke’s court in search of employment. They appeared not
to know me; but that was little to be wondered at, considering that I
had been seven years absent from my country, and that the calamities by
which I had been overtaken more than once during that period, might be
supposed to have produced a greater effect upon me than the mere lapse
of years would have done. Among the rest I remarked Gaspar de Coligny,
who was only twenty-one years of age at the time I quitted France,
and had then been remarked as one of the most promising young men his
country had to boast. His stay here was expected to be short; his
hopes in his own country, from the greatness of his connections, were
of the highest class; and he had only come to Dresden at the earnest
invitation of duke Maurice, who entertained an ardent affection for
him. My heart led me towards him; policy concurred in dictating the
application, as, if I were fortunate enough to gain his favour, my son
could not have a friend better qualified either to form his character
or forward his advancement.

I wrote to Coligny to announce my request to him, and in a few hours
after the delivery of my letter that young nobleman came in person
to wait on me. He informed me that he had done so, because he had
something of delicacy to mention, which he did not choose to trust to
the intermission of a third person, and upon which, as he hoped I could
remove his scruple, he did not like even to bestow the formality of
putting it on paper.

“I am a gentleman of France,” said Coligny; “you will excuse my
frankness. I am a gentleman of France; you will not wonder at the
niceness of my honour. Mixing in society, I do not pretend minutely to
investigate the character of every person with whom I converse; but
what you ask of me obliges me to consult my understanding, and enquire
into facts. I cannot consent to vouch for any man’s character to
another, till I have paid some attention to the ground upon which that
character rests.

“I remember the count de St. Leon with pleasure and advantage at the
court of my own sovereign. Every one admired his accomplishments, his
gallantry, and his learning; every one spoke of him with respect.
Unfortunate circumstances, as we all understood, deprived you of your
patrimony; that is nothing to me; I respect a nobleman in misfortune,
as much as when he is surrounded with wealth and splendour. You retired
into voluntary exile; I heard, with great grief, of some subsequent
calamities that have overtaken you. But, here in Saxony, I see you
resuming all your former splendour, and coming forward with the
magnificence of a prince. Other of your countrymen have remarked it,
as well as myself, and feel themselves at a loss to account for what
they see.

“Excuse me, count! by your application to me, you oblige me to speak
freely. I dare say you can clear up the difficulty, and account for
this second revolution in your fortune, upon which I shall then be
the first to congratulate you. I cannot suspect a man, with your high
descent and the illustrious character you formerly maintained, of any
thing dishonourable. But you have not sufficiently considered the
account we all owe to one another, and the clearness of proceeding we
are obliged to maintain, not only to our own hearts, but in the face
of the world. The present occasion is, I trust, fortunate for you;
and, when you have assisted me in complying with the rules by which
every honourable man governs himself, I shall be eager to publish your
justification, and render you all the service in my power.”

I was ready to burst with astonishment and vexation during this
representation of Coligny. I could feel my colour change from pale to
red, and from red to pale. I could only answer with suffocation and
inward rage, that I was much obliged to him; I would consider what he
said; I would acquaint him with my justification; and, whenever it was
made, he might be assured it should be an ample one.--I was cautious
as to what I uttered; I could not immediately foresee what it was
eligible, or what it was possible, to do; and I was resolved that I
would not, by an idle or hasty expression, preclude myself, in a matter
of so much moment, from the benefits of future deliberation. If what
I had just heard had come from any other person, I should probably
have despised it; but I felt at once that Gaspar de Coligny might be
considered, in a case of this sort, as the representative of all that
was most honourable and illustrious in my native country.--Finding that
I was indisposed to any further communication on the subject, he took a
polite leave, and departed.

I was no sooner alone than I felt myself overwhelmed with mortification
and shame. I had rejoiced in the bequests of the stranger, because I
regarded them as the means of restoring me to splendour, and replacing
my children in the situation to which they were entitled by their
birth. Was that which I had regarded as the instrument of their glory,
to become the medium of their ignominy and disgrace? I had suffered all
other misfortunes, but the whisper of dishonour had never been breathed
against me. I was a son of honour, descended of a race of heroes, and
cradled in the lap of glory and fame. When we quitted Paris in the
year 1537, my incomparable wife had set to sale our entire property,
resolved that, though driven into exile, we would not leave it in the
power of the meanest individual to controvert the sacred attention we
yielded to every just obligation. Since that time I had declined from
the splendour of rank to the humble situation of a rustic, cultivating
my little property with my own hands; nay, I had even, for a short
time, hired myself as a labourer in the garden of the bishop of
Constance. But the same disdain of every thing disgraceful had followed
me to my cottage and my truckle bed, which I had originally learned in
the halls of chivalry and the castle of my ancestors. Accordingly I had
uniformly retained the same honourable character and spotless fame.
St. Leon, the virtuous cottager, had in nothing blemished the name of
St. Leon, surrounded with glory in the siege of Pavia. Often, and with
pride, had I pointed out this circumstance to my son, adding, Wherever
fortune calls you, for whatever scenes you may be reserved, remember
that your father was unfortunate, but that through life he never acted
a deed nor conceived a thought, that should stain your manly cheeks
with the blush of shame! I stand before you a culprit, as having
robbed you of your patrimony, but I have preserved for you entire the
inheritance of our honour!

This had been the first lesson imprinted upon my infant mind. All other
possessions I had ever held cheap and worthless in comparison with that
of an illustrious name. My indignation at the attack it now sustained
was boundless. The more I thought, the more intolerable it appeared. I
was impatient and furious, like a lion struggling in the toils. I could
with joy have trampled under my feet whoever aspersed me. I could have
wantoned in blood, and defied my adversaries to mortal combat. Alas,
all my fury was useless here! It was no tale whispered in the dark
that I had to contend with; it was the commentary of the world upon
incontestable facts. Though a hecatomb of souls should be sacrificed
at the shrine of my blasted name, the facts would still remain, the
mystery still require to be solved. Coligny, the virtuous Coligny,
had made no observations on the circumstances he mentioned; he merely
proposed a difficulty, and waited my answer.

I was called upon to exercise the whole of my deliberative powers as
to the reply which was to be returned, or the conduct to be held, upon
the question of Coligny. Every thing I most valued was now at issue;
and a false step taken under the present circumstances could never
be retrieved. I had another sort of party to deal with here, than
when I had told Marguerite the tale of the stranger and his legacy.
Nothing would pass now, but what bore an open, fair, and unequivocal
appearance. I must vent no assertion that could not bear to be sifted
to the bottom, and that did not fully accord with all the vouchers with
which it could be collated. I had written to Marguerite, immediately
after launching into the expense with which our tour had been attended,
that I had received an unexpected acquisition from the death of a
relation of my own family in France. I knew that the story of the three
thousand crowns would no longer account for the style in which I was
proceeding, and this fabrication suggested itself upon the spur of the
moment. I hated to think of the difficulties in the way of explanation
in which I was involved; I abhorred the system of falsehood I was
driven to practise. It did not occur to me at the time, infatuated as
I was! that I should have occasion to account for this accession of
wealth to any one out of my own family. Marguerite, I well knew, had no
correspondence in France, nor therefore any obvious means of verifying
or refuting this second deception. But such a story could not be told
to noblemen of France, without being instantly liable to be compared
with known facts, and eventually investigated upon the spot where the
scene was laid. Marguerite herself, I well knew, had listened with
incredulity to the explanation I had made, and the alleged legacy of
the stranger; what could I expect from indifferent hearers? They
might not all possess her good sense and sagacity in judging; but they
were destitute of that personal kindness and partiality which were
calculated to induce her to credit whatever I affirmed. Most men have a
malignant pleasure in the detection of specious pretences, in humbling
the importunate superiority that obscures their claims, and removing
the rival who might otherwise acquire the prize of which they are in
pursuit.

My mind was still torn and distracted with these contemplations, when
in the afternoon of the same day on which I had received the visit of
Coligny, my attention was suddenly roused by the abrupt entrance of
my son into the chamber where I was sitting. He opened the door with
a hurried action as he entered, and, having closed it impetuously
after him, advanced directly towards me. He then stopped himself; and,
turning from me, I could perceive a rush of crimson in his face like
that of a man suffocated. A passion of tears succeeded that shook his
frame, and sufficiently proved that his feelings had sustained some
extraordinary shock. My whole soul was alarmed at what I saw; and,
following him as he retired to the other side of the room, in the
gentlest accents I endeavoured to soothe him, while I enquired with
earnestness and trepidation into the cause of his grief.




CHAPTER XVII.


He repelled me. “Sit down, sir, sit down! Do not follow me, I beg of
you; but sit down!”

His manner was earnest and emphatical. Mechanically and without knowing
what I did, I obeyed his direction. He came towards me.

“I have no time,” added he, “for qualifying and form. Tell me! am I the
son of a man of honour or a villain?”

He saw I was shocked at the unexpected rudeness of his question.

“Forgive me, my father! I have always been affectionate and dutiful;
I have ever looked up to you as my model and my oracle. But I have
been insulted! It never was one of your lessons to teach me to bear an
insult!”

“Is it,” replied I, with the sternness that the character of a father
will seldom fail to inspire under such circumstances, “because you have
been insulted, that you think yourself authorised to come home and
insult him to whom you owe nothing but respect and reverence?”

“Stop, sir! Before you claim my reverence, you must show your title to
it, and wipe off the aspersions under which you at present labour.”

“Insolent, presumptuous boy! Know that I am not by you to be instructed
in my duty, and will not answer so rude a questioner! The down as yet
scarcely shades your school-boy’s cheek; and have you so forgotten the
decencies of life as to scoff your father?”--His eye brightened as I
spoke.

“You are right, sir. It gives me pleasure to see your blood rise in
return to my passion. Your accent is the accent of innocence. But,
indeed! the more innocent and noble you shall prove yourself, the more
readily will you forgive my indignation.”

“I cannot tell. My temper does not fit me to bear the rudeness of a
son. Nor do I think that such behaviour as this can be any credit to
you, whatever may have been the provocation. Tell me however what is
the insult that has thus deeply shaken you?”

“I went this afternoon to the tennis-court near the river, and played
several games with the young count Luitmann. While we were playing,
came in the chevalier Dupont, my countryman. The insolence of his
nature is a subject of general remark; and he has, though I know not
for what reason, conceived a particular animosity to me. A trifling
dispute arose between us. We gradually warmed. He threatened to turn me
out of the court; I resented the insult; and he passionately answered,
that the son of an adventurer and a sharper had no business there,
and he would take care I should never be admitted again. I attempted
to strike him, but was prevented; and presently learned that the
sudden and unexplained way in which we have emerged from poverty was
the ground of his aspersion. As I gained time, and reflected more
distinctly upon what was alleged, I felt that personal violence could
never remove an accusation of this sort. I saw too, though, intoxicated
as I had idly been with the unwonted splendour to which I was
introduced, I had not adverted to it at the time, that the case was of
a nature that required explanation. I had been accustomed to reverence
and an implicit faith in the wisdom and rectitude of my parents, and
therefore encountered in silent submission the revolution of our
fortune. But this neutrality will suffice no longer.

“To you, sir, I resort for explanation. Send me back to the insolent
youth and his companions, with a plain and unanswerable tale, that may
put to silence for ever these brutal scoffs and reproaches. Let it be
seen this night which of the two has most fully merited to be thrust
out of honourable society. I trust I have not so demeaned myself but
that our mutual companions will join to compel this unmannered boor to
retract his aspersions.”

“Charles, you are too warm and impetuous!”--

“Too warm, sir! when I hear my father loaded with the foulest
appellations?”

“You are young and ill qualified to terminate in the proper way a
business of this serious aspect: leave it to me!”

“Excuse me, my father! Though the names I have repeated were bestowed
upon you, it was against me that the insult was employed. I must return
immediately, and obtain justice. This is a moment that must in some
degree fix my character for fortitude and determination, and I cannot
withdraw from the duty it imposes. Only tell me what I have to say.
Furnish me with a direct and unambiguous explanation of what Dupont has
objected to us, and I undertake for the rest.”

“I see, my son, that you are moved, and I will trust you!”

He seized my hand, he gazed earnestly in my face, he seemed prepared to
devour every word I should utter.

“Gaspar de Coligny, the flower of the French nobility, has been with me
this morning. He has stated to me in an ingenuous and friendly way the
same difficulty with which Dupont has so brutally taunted you. I was
meditating and arranging my answer but now, when you entered the room.”

As I uttered these words, Charles let go my hand, and withdrew his
eyes, with evident tokens of disappointment and chagrin. He paused for
a few moments, and then resumed:--

“Why do you tell me of meditation and arrangement! Why did you send
away Coligny unanswered, or why baffle and evade the earnestness of my
enquiries? I know not all the sources of wealth; but I cannot doubt
that the medium through which wealth has honourably flowed may, without
effort and premeditation, easily be explained. A just and a brave man
acts fearlessly and with explicitness; he does not shun, but court, the
scrutiny of mankind; he lives in the face of day, and the whole world
confesses the clearness of his spirit and the rectitude of his conduct.

“Sir, I have just set my foot on the threshold of life. There is one
lesson you have taught me, which I swear never to forget,--to hold life
and all its pleasures cheap, in comparison with an honourable fame.
My soul burns with the love of distinction. I am impatient to burst
away from the goal, and commence the illustrious career. I feel that I
have a hand and a heart capable of executing the purposes that my soul
conceives. Uninured to dishonour, or to any thing that should control
the passion of my bosom, think, sir, what are my emotions at what has
just occurred!

“I was bred in obscurity and a humble station. I owed this
disadvantage, you tell me, to your error. I forgave you; I was content;
I felt that it was incumbent on me by my sword and my own exertions
to hew my way to distinction. You have since exchanged the lowness of
our situation for riches and splendour. At this revolution I felt no
displeasure; I was well satisfied to start upon more advantageous terms
in the race I determined to run. But, sir, whence came these riches?
Riches and poverty are comparatively indifferent to me; but I was not
born to be a mark for shame to point her finger at. A little while ago
you were poor; you were the author of your own poverty; you dissipated
your paternal estate. Did I reproach you? No; you were poor, but not
dishonoured! I attended your couch in sickness; I exerted my manual
labour to support you in affliction. I honoured you for your affection
to my mother; I listened with transport to the history of your youth;
I was convinced I should never blush to call Reginald de St. Leon my
father. I believed that lessons of honour, so impressive as those you
instilled into my infant mind, could never flow but from an honourable
spirit. Oh, if there is any thing equivocal or ignoble in the riches we
have displayed, restore me, instantly restore me, to unblemished and
virtuous poverty!”

I was astonished at the firmness and manliness of spirit that Charles
upon this occasion discovered. I could scarcely believe that these
were the thoughts and words of a youth under seventeen years of age.
I felt that every thing illustrious and excellent might be augured of
one who, at these immature years, manifested so lofty and generous a
soul. I could have pressed him in my arms, have indulged my emotions in
sobs and tears of transport, and congratulated myself that I was father
to so worthy a son. But his temper and manners awed, and held me at a
distance. This was one consequence of the legacies of the stranger!

“Charles!” said I, “your virtues extort my confidence. For the world
a tale must be prepared that shall serve to elude its curiosity and
its malice. But to you I confess, there is a mystery annexed to the
acquisition of this wealth that can never be explained.”

He stood aghast at my words. “Am I to believe my ears? A tale prepared?
A mystery never to be explained? I adjure you by all that you love, and
all that you hold sacred----!”

His voice was drowned in a sudden gush of tears. With an action of
earnestness and deprecation, he took hold of my hand.

“No, sir, no artful tale, no disguise, no hypocrisy!----” As he
spoke, his voice suddenly changed, his accent became clear and
determined.--“Will you consent this very hour to quit the court of
Dresden, and to resign fully and without reserve this accursed wealth,
for the acquisition of which you refuse to account?”

“Whence,” replied I, “have you the insolence to make such a
proposal?----No, I will not!”

“Then I swear by the omnipresent and eternal God, you shall never see
or hear of me more!”

I perceived that this was no time for the assertion of paternal
authority. I saw that the poor boy was strangely and deeply moved,
and I endeavoured to soothe him. I felt that the whole course of his
education had inspired him with an uncontrollable and independent
spirit, and that it was too late to endeavour to repress it.

“My dear Charles,” said I, “what is come to you? When I listen to a
language like this from your lips, I scarcely know you for my son. This
impertinent Dupont has put you quite beside yourself. Another time we
will talk over the matter calmly; and depend upon it, every thing shall
be made out to your satisfaction.”

“Do not imagine, sir, that my self-possession is not perfect and
complete. I know what I do, and my resolution is unalterable. If you
have any explanation to give, give it now. If you will yield to my
proposal, declare your assent, and I am again your son. But to bear the
insults of my fellows unanswered, or to live beneath the consciousness
of an artful and fictitious tale, no consideration on earth shall
induce me. I love you, sir; I cannot forget your lessons or your
virtues. I love my mother and my sisters; no words can tell how dearly
and how much. But my resolution is taken; I separate myself from you
all and for ever. Nothing in my mind can come in competition with a
life of unblemished honour.”

“And are you such a novice, as to need the being told that honour is a
prize altogether out of the reach of an unknown and desolate wanderer,
such as you propose to become? My wealth, boy, is unlimited, and can
buy silence from the malicious, and shouts and applause from all the
world. A golden key unlocks the career of glory, which the mean and the
pennyless are never allowed to enter.”

“I am not such a novice, as not to have heard the language of vice,
though I never expected to hear it from a father. Poverty with
integrity shall content me. The restless eagerness of my spirit is so
great, that I will trust to its suggestions, and hope to surmount the
obstacles of external appearance. If I am disappointed in this, and
destined to perish unheard of and unremembered, at least I will escape
reproach. I will neither be charged with the deeds, nor give utterance
to the maxims, of dishonour.”

“Charles,” replied I, “be not the calumniator of your father! I swear
to you by every thing that is sacred; and you know my integrity; never
did the breath of falsehood pollute these lips;----”

He passionately interrupted me. “Did the stranger bequeath you three
thousand crowns? Have you lately received an unexpected acquisition by
the death of a near relation in France?”

I was silent. This was not a moment for trifling and equivocation.

“Oh, my father, how is your character changed and subverted? You say
true. For sixteen years I never heard a breath of falsehood from your
lips; I trusted you as I would the oracles of eternal truth. But it
is past! A few short months have polluted and defaced a whole life
of integrity! In how many obscurities and fabulous inconsistencies
have you entangled yourself? Nor is it the least of the calamities
under which my heart sickens at this moment, that I am reduced to hold
language like this to a father!”

What misery was mine, to hear myself thus arraigned by my own son,
and to be unable to utter one word in reply to his accusations! To
be thus triumphed over by a stripling; and to feel the most cruel
degradation, in the manifestation of an excellence that ought to have
swelled my heart with gratulation and transport! I had recollected my
habitual feelings for near forty years of existence; I had dropped from
my memory my recent disgrace, and dared to appeal to my acknowledged
veracity; when this retort from my son came to plunge me tenfold deeper
in a sea of shame. He proceeded:--

“I am no longer your son! I am compelled to disclaim all affinity
with you! But this is not all. By your dishonour you have cut me off
from the whole line of my ancestors. I cannot claim affinity with
them, without acknowledging my relation to you. You have extinguished
abruptly an illustrious house. The sun of St. Leon is set for ever!
Standing as I do a candidate for honourable fame, I must henceforth
stand by myself, as if a man could be author of his own existence,
and must expect no aid, no favour, no prepossession, from any earthly
consideration, save what I am, and what I shall perform.”

“My son,” replied I, “you cut me to the heart. Such is the virtue you
display, that I must confess myself never to have been worthy of you,
and I begin to fear I am now less worthy of you than ever. Yet you must
suffer me to finish what I was about to say when you so passionately
interrupted me. I swear then, by every thing that is sacred, that I
am innocent. Whatever interpretation the world may put upon my sudden
wealth, there is no shadow of dishonesty or guilt connected with its
acquisition. The circumstances of the story are such that they must
never be disclosed; I am bound to secrecy by the most inviolable
obligations, and this has led me to utter a forged and inconsistent
tale. But my conscience has nothing with which to reproach me. If then,
Charles, my son, once my friend, my best and dearest consolation!”--I
pressed his hand, and my voice faltered as I spoke,--“if you are
resolute to separate yourself from me, at least take this recollection
with you wherever you go,--Whatever may be my external estimation, I am
not the slave of vice, your father is not a villain!”

“Alas, my father!” rejoined Charles, mournfully, “what am I to believe?
What secret can be involved in so strange a reverse of fortune, that is
not dishonourable? You have given utterance to different fictions on
the subject, fictions that you now confess to be such; how am I to be
convinced that what you say at this moment is not dictated more by a
regard for my tranquillity, than by the simplicity of conscious truth?
If I believe you, I am afraid my credit will be the offspring rather
of inclination, than of probability. And indeed, if I believe you,
what avails it? The world will not believe. Your character is blasted;
your honour is destroyed; and, unless I separate myself from you, and
disown your name, I shall be involved in the same disgrace.”

Saying thus, he left me, and in about half an hour returned. His return
I had not foreseen; I had made no use of his absence. My mind was
overcome, my understanding was stupified, by a situation and events
I had so little expected. I had stood, unmoved, leaning against the
wall, from the instant of his departure. I seemed rooted to the spot,
incapable of calling up my fortitude, or arranging my ideas. My eyes
had rolled,--my brow was knit,--I had bit my lips and my tongue with
agony. From time to time I had muttered a few words,--“My son! my
son!--wealth! wealth!--my wife!--my son!” but they were incoherent and
without meaning.

Charles re-entered the apartment where the preceding conversation had
passed, and the noise he made in entering roused me. He had his hat
in his hand, which he threw from him, and exclaimed with an accent of
dejection and anguish, “My father!--farewell!”

“Cruel, cruel boy! can you persist in your harsh and calamitous
resolution? If you have no affection for me, yet think of your mother
and your sisters!”

Seek not, sir, to turn me from my purpose! The struggle against
it in my own bosom has been sufficiently severe; but it must be
executed.“--His voice, as he spoke, was inward, stifled, and broken
with the weight of his feelings.

“Then--farewell!” I replied. “Yet take with you some provision for
your long and perilous adventure. Name the sum you will accept, and,
whatever is its amount, it shall instantly be yours.”

“I will have nothing. It is this wealth, with whose splendour I was at
first child enough to be dazzled, that has destroyed us. My fingers
shall not be contaminated with an atom of it. What is to be my fate,
as yet, I know not. But I am young, and strong, and enterprising, and
courageous. The lessons of honour and nobility live in my bosom. Though
my instructor is lost, his instructions shall not be vain!

“Once more farewell! From my heart I thank you for your protestations
of innocence. Never will I part with this last consolation, to believe
them. I have recollected the manner in which they were uttered; it was
the manner of truth. If there be any evidence of a contrary tendency,
that I will forget. Though to the world I shall be without father and
without relatives, I will still retain this sacred consolation for my
hours of retirement and solitude, that my ancestors were honourable,
and my father, in spite of all presumptions to the contrary,--was
innocent.

“How hard it is to quit for ever a family of love and affection, as
ours has been! Bear witness for me, how deeply, I sympathised with you
at Paris, in Switzerland, in Constance! Though now you dissolve the tie
between us, yet, till now, never had a son greater reason for gratitude
to a father. You and my mother have made me what I am; and that I may
preserve what you have made me, I now cast myself upon an untried
world. The recollection of what I found you in the past period of my
life, shall be for ever cherished in my memory!

“I quit my mother and my sisters without leave-taking or adieu. It will
be a fruitless and painful addition to what each party must learn to
bear. Dear, excellent, peerless protector and companions of my early
years! my wishes are yours, my prayers shall for ever be poured out for
you! You, sir, who rob them of a son and a brother, be careful to make
up to them a loss, which I doubt not they will account grievous! I can
do nothing for them. I can throw myself into the arms of poverty; it is
my duty. But, in doing so, I must separate myself from them, assuredly
innocent, and worthy of more and greater benefits than I could ever
confer on them!--Farewell!”

Saying this, he threw himself into my arms, and I felt the agonies of a
parting embrace.




CHAPTER XVIII.


For some time I could not believe him departed. When I retired to rest,
I felt the want of Charles to press my hand, and wish me refreshing
slumbers; and I passed on, sad and solitary, to my chamber. When I
came next morning into the breakfasting room, Charles was not there,
to greet me with looks of affection and duty; and the gilding and
ornaments of the apartment were to me no less disconsolate than the
damps and sootiness of a dungeon.

I hoped he would return. I knew how tenderly he was attached to his
mother and his sisters; I was fully convinced that the affection for me
which had been the perpetual habit of his mind, could not be entirely
eradicated from his heart. I mentioned him not in my letters to
Constance; the pen lingered, my hand trembled, when I thought of him; I
could neither pretend that he was with me, nor announce the catastrophe
of his absence. But I opened the letters of Marguerite with still
increasing impatience. Finding that he did not return to me, I hoped
that some alteration of the extraordinary resolution he had formed,
would lead him to Constance. In vain I hoped! There reached me, by no
conveyance, from no quarter, tidings of my son!

How surprising an event! A youth, not seventeen years of age, forming
and executing in the same instant the purpose of flying from his
parents and his family! Deserting all his hopes, all his attachments,
all his fortune! Refusing the smallest particle of assistance or
provision in his entrance upon the wide scene of the world! Oh,
Charles! exclaimed I, you are indeed an extraordinary and admirable
youth! But are you fortified against all the temptations of the world
and all its hardships? Do your tender years qualify you to struggle
with its unkindness, its indifference, and its insults? In how few
quarters is merit ever treated with the attention and benevolence it
deserves! How often is it reduced to tremble with indignation, at
the scoffs and brutality to which it is exposed, and at the sight of
folly and vice exalted in its stead, and appointed its despot and its
master! My son, my son! what will be your fate? Is your unseasoned
frame reserved to perish by hunger, in barren deserts and beneath
inclement skies? Will you not in some hour of bitter disappointment and
unpitied loneliness, lay yourself down in despair and die? Will you
not be made the slave of some capricious tyrant for bread? Generous
as is your nature, will it be eternally proof against reiterated
temptation? Upon what a world are you turned adrift! a world of
which you know as little, as the poor affrighted soul of a dying
man knows, when launching into the mysterious, impenetrable abyss
of eternity! Unnatural father, to have reduced my only son to this
cruel alternative! I should with a less aching and agonising heart
have accompanied his senseless remains to the grave. Dreadful as
that parting is, there at least the anxious mind of the survivor has
rest. There are no thoughts and devices in the silence of the tomb.
There all our prospects end, and we are no longer sensible to pain,
to persecution, to insult, and to agony. But Charles, thus departed,
wandering on the face of the globe, without protector, adviser or
resource, no lapse of years can put a close upon my anxiety for him!
If I am in ease and prosperity, I cannot relish them, for my exposed
and living son may be at that moment in the depth of misery! If I am
myself oppressed and suffering, the thought of what may be his fate
will form a dreadful addition to all my other calamities! What am I
to say of him upon my return to Constance? If he had died, this was a
natural casualty; and, whatever grief it might occasion, time no doubt
would mollify and abate it. But what account can now be rendered of him
to his disconsolate mother and terrified sisters? How can I lift up my
head in their presence, or meet the glance of their reproachful eyes!

The idea had occurred to me, in the instant of Charles’s departure, and
immediately after his exit, of detaining or bringing him back by force.
He was by his extreme youth, according to the maxims of the world,
still in a state of guardianship, and unqualified to be the chooser
of his own actions. But to this mode of proceeding, however deeply I
felt the catastrophe which had taken place, I could never consent. It
was in utter hostility to the lessons of chivalry and honour, with
which I had been familiarised from my earliest infancy. There might
be cases, in which this restraint laid by a father upon his child
would be salutary. But the idea which had occasioned the secession of
Charles, was decisive in this instance. What right had I to chain him
to dishonour? The whole bent of his education had been, to impress him
with the feelings by which he was now actuated. If I detained him
for a short time, was there any vigilance on earth that could finally
prevent him from executing a purpose upon which his whole soul was
resolved? Or, suppose there were, must not the consequence be to break
his spirit, to deprive him of all manliness and energy, and to render
him the mere drooping and soulless shadow of that conspicuous hero I
had been anxious to make him? It might be said indeed, that this was
the determination of a boy, formed in an hour, and that, if I detained
him only long enough for deliberation and revisal, he would of his
own accord retract so desperate a project. But I felt that it was a
resolution formed to endure, and was built upon principles that could
not change so long as an atom of his mind remained. No; I was rather
disposed to say, however grievous was the wound he inflicted on me, Go,
my son! Act upon the dictates of your choice, as I have acted on mine!
I admire your resolution, though I cannot imitate it. Your purpose is
lofty and godlike; and he that harbours it, was not born to be a slave.
Be free; and may every power propitious to generosity and virtue smooth
your path through life, and smile upon your desires!

The anguish I felt for having lost my son, and in this painful and
reproachful manner, was not diminished to me either by society or
amusement. I dared not go out of my house. I saw no one but my own
attendants. I had not the courage to meet the aspect of a human
creature. I knew not how far persons in Dresden might have heard the
injurious reports which occasioned the flight of my son, or even have
been acquainted with the nature of that flight. I had promised to see
Coligny again; but, alas! the affair which had at first led me to
wish to see him, was now at an end. I had no heart to seek him; nor
indeed did I know what story I was to tell him, or how I was to remove
the suspicions he had urged against me. The machine of human life,
though constituted of a thousand parts, is in all its parts regularly
and systematically connected; nor is it easy to insert an additional
member, the spuriousness of which an accurate observation will not
readily detect. How was I to assign a source of my wealth different
from the true, which would not be liable to investigation, and, when
investigated, would not be seen to be counterfeit? This indeed is the
prime source of individual security in human affairs, that whatever any
man does, may be subjected to examination, and whatever does not admit
of being satisfactorily accounted for, exposes him whom it concerns to
the most injurious suspicions. This law of our nature, so salutary in
its general operation, was the first source of all my misfortunes.

I began now seriously to consider what judgment I was to pass upon
the bequests of the stranger. Were they to be regarded as a benefit
or a misfortune? Ought they to be classed with the poisoned robe of
Nessus, which, being sent as a token of affection, was found, in the
experiment, to eat into the flesh and burn up the vitals of him that
wore it? Should I from this instant reject their use, and, returning to
the modes of life established among my fellow men, content myself with
the affection of those with whom I had intercourse, though poverty and
hardships mingled with the balm?

The experiment I had made of these extraordinary gifts was a short one;
but how contrary were all the results I had arrived at, from those
I looked for? When the stranger had appeared six months before at
the cottage of the lake, he had found me a poor man indeed, but rich
in the confidence, and happy in the security and content, of every
member of my family. I lived in the bosom of nature, surrounded with
the luxuriance of its gifts and the sublimity of its features, which
the romantic elevation of my soul particularly fitted me to relish.
In my domestic scene I beheld the golden age renewed, the simplicity
of pastoral life without its grossness, a situation remote from
cities and courts, from traffic and hypocrisy, yet not unadorned with
taste, imagination, and knowledge. Never was a family more united in
sentiments and affection. Now all this beauteous scene was defaced!
All was silence, suspicion, and reserve. The one party dared not be
ingenuous, and the other felt that all the paradise of attachment was
dwindled to an empty name. No questions were asked; for no honest
answer was given or expected. Though corporeally we might sit in the
same apartment, in mind a gulf, wide, impassable, and tremendous,
gaped between us. My wife pined in speechless grief, and, it was to
be feared, had sustained a mortal blow. My son, my only son, a youth
of such promise that I would not have exchanged him for empires, had
disappeared, and, as he had solemnly protested, for ever. My heart
was childless: my bosom was bereaved of its dearest hope. It was for
him principally that I had accepted, that I had rejoiced in the gifts
of the stranger. My darling vision was to see him clothed in the
harness, surrounded with the insignia, of a hero. There was nothing
I so earnestly desired as that his merits, graced with the favours
of fortune, might cause him to stand confessed the first subject of
France; a situation more enviable than that of its monarch, since he
who holds it is raised by deeds, and the other only by birth; and if
less respected by interested courtiers, is certain to be more honoured
by the impartial voice of history. But, if I felt thus desolate and
heartbroken for the loss of my son, what would be the sentiments of
his mother, more susceptible to feel, and, in her present weakness of
spirits, less vigorous to bear, than myself, when the dreadful tidings
should be communicated to her?

Yet I could not resolve to renounce donations which I had so dearly
appropriated. I held it to be a base and cowardly to surrender gifts so
invaluable, upon so insufficient an experiment. He, I thought, must be
a man of ignoble and grovelling spirit, who could easily be prevailed
on to part with unbounded wealth and immortal life. I had but just
entered the vast field that was opened to me. It was of the nature of
all great undertakings to be attended with difficulties and obstacles
in the commencement, to present a face calculated to discourage the man
that is infirm of purpose. But it became my descent, my character and
pretensions, to show myself serene in the midst of storms. Perseverance
and constancy are the virtues of a man. Affairs of this extensive
compass often prove in the issue the reverse of what they seemed in
the outset. The tempest might be expected to disperse, difficulties
to unravel themselves, and unlooked-for concurrences to arise. All
opposition and hostile appearance give way before him who goes calmly
onward, and scorns to be dismayed.




CHAPTER XIX.


It was thus that I spurred myself to persist in the path upon which I
had entered. Having remained some time at Dresden, flattering myself
with the hope that Charles might yet join me before I quitted that
city, I began to think of once more turning my steps towards the
residence of my family. This was no cheerful thought; but upon what
was I to determine? I had a wife whom I ardently loved, and three
daughters the darlings of my heart. Because I had lost a beloved son
was I to estrange myself from these? I already felt most painfully
the detachment and widowhood to which I was reduced, and I clung with
imperious affection to what remained of my race. The meeting I purposed
must be a melancholy one; but, in the sorrows of the heart there is a
purer and nobler gratification than in the most tumultuous pleasures
where affection is silent. I looked forward indeed to scenes of endless
variety and attraction, but in the mean time what seemed first to
demand my attention was the beloved circle I had left behind in the
city of Constance.

I retraced, upon the present occasion, the route I had lately pursued
with my son. How different were now my sensations! My heart was then
indeed painfully impressed with the variance and dissolution of
confidence that had arisen between me and his mother. It was perhaps
principally for the sake of banishing this impression that I had had
recourse to the splendour of equipage and attendance which was first
assumed upon the journey from Constance to Dresden. Nor, frivolous as
this expedient may appear in the unattractive dispassionateness of
narrative, had it been by any means weak of effect at the time it was
employed. When Charles was once mounted on his proud and impatient
steed, and decorated in rich and costly attire, I felt, as it were, the
sluggishness of my imagination roused; I surveyed his shape and his
countenance with inexpressible complacence; and already anticipated
the period when he was to become the favourite of his sovereign and
his country’s pride. Now I returned with the same retinue; but the
place that had been occupied by my son was empty. I sought him with
frantic and restless gaze; I figured him to my disturbed and furious
imagination, till the sensations and phantoms of my brain became
intolerable; I raved and imprecated curses on myself. I endeavoured to
divert my thoughts by observing the scenes that passed before me. They
talked to me of Charles; they had been pointed out by each to each, and
had been the subject of our mutual comment. Though Charles was endowed
with a high relish for the beauties of nature, and, in our little
retreat on the borders of the lake, had lived in the midst of them,
he had seen little of the variety of her features; and the journey we
made through the heart of Germany had furnished him with continual food
for admiration and delight. Nor did the scenes I beheld merely remind
me of the sensations they produced in Charles; they led me through a
wider field. I recollected long conversations and digressive excursions
which had been started by the impression they made. I recollected many
passages and occurrences to which they had not the slightest reference,
but which, having arisen while they constituted the visible scene, were
forcibly revived by its re-appearance. Thus, from various causes, my
lost and lamented son was not a moment out of my thoughts during the
journey. While I continued at Dresden, I seemed daily to expect his
return; but no sooner did I quit that city than despair took possession
of my heart.

Thus, anxious and distressed, I arrived at Prague, and soon after
at Ratisbon. I travelled slowly, because, though I was desirous of
returning to Constance, I anticipated my arrival there with little
complacence. As I drew nearer to my family, I felt more distinctly
the impossibility of presenting myself before them, without first
endeavouring to take off the shock they would sustain at seeing me
return without my son. I therefore resolved to send forward a servant
from Ratisbon, whom I directed to make all practicable speed, as I
designed to wait for an answer he should bring me at the city of
Munich. To attempt to write to Marguerite on this subject was a severe
trial to me. The whole however that I proposed to myself was, to
remove the surprise which would be occasioned by seeing me alone, and
to anticipate questions that it would be impossible for me to hear
without anguish of mind and perturbation of countenance. I therefore
took care to express myself in such terms as should lead Marguerite
to believe that I had voluntarily left her son in Saxony, and that in
no very long time he would rejoin his family. I trusted to subsequent
events to unfold the painful catastrophe, and could not prevail on
myself to shock her maternal feelings so much as I must necessarily do,
if I informed her of the whole at once. Charles had not been mentioned
but in ordinary terms and the accustomed language of affection, in the
letters I had recently received from Constance; and I was therefore
convinced that he had neither gone to that place, nor had conveyed
thither any account of his proceedings.

The answer I received from Marguerite by my messenger was as follows:--

“Your absence has been long and critical, and the welfare of your
daughters seems to require that we should rejoin each other as speedily
as may be. Whether we should meet here or at any other place you must
determine. It is, however, right I should inform you that, during your
absence, rumour has been busy with your reputation. What the extent or
importance of the ill reports circulated of you may be, I am scarcely
competent to judge. We have lived in uniform privacy, and it is natural
to suppose that the portion of censure that has reached us is but a
small part of what really exists. The mode in which you have proceeded,
and the extraordinary figure you have made in a progress through
Germany, have given weight to these insinuations. But it is not my
intention to comment on what you have done.

“You appear to design that I should understand you have left my son
behind you in Saxony. Poor Charles! I had a letter from him three weeks
ago, in which he informs me of what has happened, and apologises in
the most pathetic terms for any seeming want of regard to me in his
conduct, at the very moment that his heart bleeds for my fate. I did
not think it necessary to communicate this circumstance to you. I have
done with complaining. Now that I have fallen into the worst and most
unlooked-for misfortunes, I have a gratification that I do not choose
to part with, in shutting up my sorrows in my own breast.

“Oh, Charles! my son, my idol! What is become of you? For what
calamities are you reserved? He tells me it is necessary that I should
never see or hear of him again. Never--I--his mother!--Reginald, there
are some wounds that we may endeavour to forgive; but they leave a
sentiment in the heart, the demonstrations of which may perhaps be
restrained, but which it is not in nature wholly to subdue. If I did
but know where to find or to write to my poor boy, I would take my
girls with me, and partake his honest and honourable poverty, and never
again join the shadow of him who was my husband. Forgive me, Reginald!
I did not intend to say this. If I should prove unable to control the
impatience of my grief, do not inflict the punishment of my offence on
your innocent daughters!

“As to your fiction of voluntarily leaving him behind for further
improvement, it corresponds with every thing you have lately attempted
to make me believe. I no longer expect truth from you. For seventeen
years I had a husband. Well, well! I ought not perhaps to repine. I
have had my share of the happiness which the present life is calculated
to afford.

“Reginald! I have not long to live. When I tell you this, I am not
giving way to melancholy presentiment. I will exert myself for the
benefit of my girls. They will have a grievous loss in me; and for
their sake I will live as long as I can. But I feel that you have
struck me to the heart. My nights are sleepless; my flesh is wasted; my
appetite is entirely gone. You will presently be able to judge whether
I am deceiving myself. The prospect for these poor creatures, who are
at present all my care, is a dismal one. I know not for what they are
reserved; but I can hope for nothing good. When I am dead, remember,
and be a father to them. I ask nothing for myself; I have no longer any
concern with life; but, if my dying request can have weight with you,
make up to them the duty you have broken to me. By all out past loves,
by the cordiality and confidence in which we have so long lived, by
the singleness and sincerity of our affection, by the pure delights,
so seldom experienced in married life, that have attended our union, I
conjure you listen to me and obey me in this.”

If I were deeply distressed for the loss of my son, if I looked forward
with a mingled sensation of eagerness and alarm to the approaching
interview with my family, it may easily be imagined that this letter
formed a heavy addition to my mental anguish. I confess I thought
it a cruel one. Marguerite might well suppose, that the departure
of Charles was a circumstance I must strongly feel; and she should
not have thus aggravated the recent wounds of paternal grief. Some
allowance, however, was to be made for a mother. When we are ourselves
racked with intolerable pain, that certainly is not the time at which
we can rationally be expected to exert the nicest and most vigilant
consideration for another. Add to which, she was innocent of the
calamities she suffered, and could not but know that I was their sole
author. But, whatever may be decided as to the propriety of the letter,
its effect upon my mind was eminently salutary. I instantly determined
on the conduct it became me to pursue.

I lost not a moment. From Dresden to Munich I had advanced with slow
and unwilling steps; from Munich to Constance I proceeded as rapidly
as the modes of travelling and the nature of the roads would permit.
I left my retinue at the gates of the town, and flew instantly to the
apartments of my family. I hastened up stairs, and, as I entered the
sitting-room, I saw the first and most exemplary of matrons surrounded
by her blooming daughters. I instantly perceived a great alteration
in her appearance. Her look was dejected; her form emaciated; her
countenance sickly and pale. She lifted up her eyes as I entered, but
immediately dropped them again, without any discernible expression,
either of congratulation or resentment. I embraced my children with
undescribable emotion; I said within myself, the love and affection
I had reserved for Charles shall be divided among you, and added to
the share you each possess of my heart! Having saluted them in turn,
I addressed myself to Marguerite, telling her that I must have some
conversation with her instantly. My manner was earnest: she led the way
into another apartment.

I felt my heart overflowing at my tongue.

“I am come to you,” cried I, “a repenting prodigal. Take me and mould
me at your pleasure!”

She looked up. She was struck with the honest fervour of my expression.
She answered in almost forgotten terms, and with a peculiar fulness of
meaning, “My husband!”--It seemed as if the best years and the best
emotions of our life were suddenly renewed.

“Most adorable of women!” I continued: “do you think I can bear that
you should die, and I your murderer? No man in any age or climate of
the world ever owed so much to a human creature as I owe to you; no
woman was ever so ardently loved! no woman ever so much deserved to
be loved! If you were to die, I should never know peace again. If you
were to die the victim of any miscalculation of mine, I should be the
blackest of criminals!”

“Reginald!” replied she, “I am afraid I have been wrong. I am afraid I
have written harshly to you. You have a feeling heart, and I have been
too severe. Forgive me! it was the effect of love. Affection cannot
view with a tranquil eye the faults of the object beloved.”

“Let them be forgotten! Let the last six months be blotted from our
memory, be as though they had never existed!”

She looked at me. Her look seemed to say, though she would not give the
sentiment words, that can never be; the loss of Charles, and certain
other calamities of that period, are irretrievable!

“I resign myself into your hands! I have been guilty; I have had
secrets; meditations engendered and shut up in my own bosom; but it
shall be so no more! The tide of affection kept back from its natural
channel, now flows with double impetuousness. Never did I love you,
not when you first came a virgin to my arms, not on the banks of the
Garonne, not in the cottage of the lake, so fervently, so entirely, as
I love you now! Be my director; do with me as you please! I have never
been either wise or virtuous but when I have been implicitly guided by
you!

“I have wealth; I am forbidden by the most solemn obligations to
discover the source of that wealth. This only I may not communicate; in
all things else govern me despotically! Shall I resign it all? Shall I
return to the cottage of the lake? Shall I go, a houseless and helpless
wanderer, to the farthest quarter of the globe? Speak the word only,
and it shall be done! I prefer your affection, your cordial regard, in
the most obscure and meanest retreat, to all that wealth can purchase
or kings can give!”

“Reginald, I thank you! I acknowledge in your present language and
earnestness the object of my first and only love. This return to your
true character gives me all the pleasure I am now capable of receiving.
But it is too late My son is lost; that cannot be retrieved. Your
reputation is blasted; I am sorry you are returned hither; Constance
is in arms against you, and I will not answer for the consequence. For
myself; I grieve to tell you so; I am ashamed of my weakness; but--my
heart is broken! I loved you so entirely, that I was not able to
bear any suspension of our confidence. I had passed with you through
all other misfortunes, and the firmness of my temper was not shaken.
For this one misfortune, that seemed the entire dissolution of our
attachment, I was not prepared. I feel, every morning as I rise, the
warnings of my decease. My nights are sleepless; my appetite is gone
from me.”

“Oh, Marguerite, talk not thus; distract me not with the most fatal
of images! Our confidence shall return; all the causes of your malady
shall be removed! With the causes, the symptoms, depend on it, will
disappear. Your youth, your tranquillity, your happiness, shall be
renewed! Oh, no, you shall not die! We will yet live to love and peace!”

“Flatter not yourself with vain hopes, my love! I feel something wrong
within me, which is rapidly wearing my body to decay. Reconcile your
mind to what very soon must happen! Prepare yourself for being the
only parent to your remaining offspring! I have composed my spirit,
and calmly wait my fate. You have now administered to me the only
consolation I aspired to, by this return to your true character, which
affords me a sanguine hope that you will faithfully discharge the duty
to your offspring, which, when I am gone, will be doubly urgent on you.”

I was grieved to see that the mind of Marguerite was so deeply
impressed with the notion that she had but a short time to live. I
could not bear to imagine for a moment that her prognostic was just.
The thought seemed capable of driving me to distraction. I however
conceived that the best thing that could be done for the present, was
to turn the conversation to some other topic.

“Well, well, my love!” I answered. “There are some things that are
immediately pressing. Direct me, direct a husband so amply convinced
of your discretion, what I am to do at present! Shall I instantly
annihilate all that has made this unfortunate breach between us; shall
I resign my wealth, from whatever source derived? Whither shall we go?
Shall we return to the cottage of the lake? Shall we retreat into some
distant part of the world?”

“How can you expect me,” said Marguerite, faintly smiling, “to advise
you respecting the disposal of a wealth, of the amount of which I am
uninformed, and the source of which is invisible? But I guess your
secret. The stranger who died your guest was in possession of the
philosopher’s stone, and he has bequeathed to you his discovery. I have
heard of this art, though I confess I was not much inclined to credit
it. I do not ask you to confirm my conjecture: I do not wish that you
should violate my engagements into which you have entered. But, upon
putting circumstances together, which I have been inevitably compelled
to do, I apprehend it can be nothing else. I am astonished that a
conjecture so obvious should have offered itself to my mind so late.

“If your wealth is of any other nature, ample as it apparently is,
it is a natural question to ask, to whom is it to be resigned? The
ordinary wealth of the world is something real and substantial, and can
neither be created nor dissipated with a breath. But if your wealth
be of the kind I have named, let me ask, is it possible to resign it?
A secret is a thing with which we may choose whether we will become
acquainted; but, once known, we cannot become unacquainted with it at
pleasure. Your wealth, upon my supposition, will always be at your
beck; and it is perhaps beyond the strength of human nature to refuse,
under some circumstances, at least in some emergencies, to use the
wealth which is within our reach.

“It has been our mutual misfortune that such an engine has been put
into your hands. It has been your fault to make an indiscreet use of
it. Gladly would I return to the tranquil and unsuspected poverty of
the cottage of the lake. But that is impossible. You have lost your
son; you have lost your honest fame; the life of your Marguerite is
undermined and perishing. If it were possible for us to return to our
former situation and our former peace, still, my Reginald! forgive me
if I say, I doubt the inflexibleness of your resolution. The gift of
unbounded wealth, if you possess it, and, with wealth, apparently at
least, distinction and greatness, is too powerful a temptation. Nor,
though I should trust your resistance, could I be pleased in a husband
with the possession of these extraordinary powers. It sets too great
a distance between the parties. It destroys that communion of spirit
which is the soul of the marriage-tie. A consort should be a human
being and an equal. But to this equality and simple humanity it is no
longer in your power to return.

“Circumstanced then as we now are, the marriage union, you must allow
me to say, irreparably dissolved, your son lost, your fair fame
destroyed, your orphan daughters to be provided for, I know not if I
should advise you to forget the prerogative that has been bought for
you at so dreadful a price. Beside, if I am not mistaken, there are
great trials in reserve for you. I am afraid your present situation
is extremely critical. I am afraid the suspicions you have excited
will cost you dear. At all events I believe it to be but a necessary
precaution that we should fly from Constance. I have nothing therefore
to recommend to you on the subject of wealth, but discretion. I shall
not long live to be your adviser. I shall always regard the donation
you have received, you cannot wonder that I should so regard it, as one
of the most fearful calamities to which a human being can be exposed.
If you had used your prerogative with discretion, you might perhaps,
though I confess I do not see how, have escaped the obloquy of the
world. Into your domestic scene, where the interest is more lively, and
the watch upon you more unremitted, it must have introduced alienation
and distrust. As it is, I see you surrounded with dangers of a thousand
denominations. Police has its eyes upon you; superstition will regard
you as the familiar of demons; avarice will turn upon you a regard of
jealousy and insatiable appetite. If I could recover from the weakness
that at present besets me, and continue to live, I foresee more and
severer trials, both at home and abroad, than any I have yet sustained;
and I am almost thankful to that Providence which has decreed to take
me away from the evil to come.

“One thing further let me add. I will speak it, not in the character
of a censor, but a friend. It must ever be right and useful, that a
man should be undeceived in any erroneous estimate he may make of
himself. I have loved you much; I found in you many good qualities;
my imagination decorated you in the virtues that you had not; but you
have removed the veil. An adept and an alchemist is a low character.
When I married you, I supposed myself united to a nobleman, a knight,
and a soldier, a man who would have revolted with disdain from every
thing that was poor-spirited and base. I lived with you long and
happily. I saw faults; I saw imbecilities. I did not see them with
indifference; but I endeavoured, and with a degree of success, to
forget and to forgive them; they did not contaminate and corrupt
the vitals of honour. At length you have completely reversed the
scene. For a soldier you present me with a projector and a chemist, a
cold-blooded mortal, raking in the ashes of a crucible for a selfish
and solitary advantage. Here is an end of all genuine dignity, and
the truest generosity of soul. You cannot be ingenuous; for all your
dealings are secrecy and darkness. You cannot have a friend; for the
mortal lives not that can sympathise with your thoughts and emotions.
A generous spirit, Reginald, delights to live upon equal terms with
his associates and fellows. He would disdain, when offered to him,
excessive and clandestine advantages. Equality is the soul of real and
cordial society. A man of rank indeed does not live upon equal terms
with the whole of his species; but his heart also can exult, for he
has his equals. How unhappy the wretch, the monster rather let me say,
who is without an equal; who looks through the world, and in the world
cannot find a brother; who is endowed with attributes which no living
being participates with him; and who is therefore cut off for ever from
all cordiality and confidence, can never unbend himself, but lives
the solitary, joyless tenant of a prison, the materials of which are
emeralds and rubies! How unhappy this wretch! How weak and ignoble the
man that voluntarily accepts these laws of existence!”

In the advice of Marguerite I saw that sound wisdom and discernment, by
which in all the periods of our connection she had been so eminently
characterised. With her views of the future I was not disposed to
accord. I regarded them as obscured and discoloured by the unfortunate
state of her health. I could not indeed refuse to believe that the
prerogative I had received had been the parent of much domestic
unhappiness. Willingly would I have resigned all that I had derived
from the stranger, to be replaced in the situation in which his
pernicious legacies had found me. He had robbed me of my son; he had
destroyed my domestic peace; he had undermined the tranquillity and
health of the partner of my life. These calamities pressed with a heavy
and intolerable weight at my heart. But, if, as Marguerite affirmed,
they were irretrievable, or if they could once be removed, and the
domestic advantages I had heretofore enjoyed be restored, I was not
disposed to fear those external mischiefs which Marguerite so feelingly
predicted. I could not believe that I should have such a league of
foreign enemies to encounter, nor could I easily image to myself any
external evils which it was not in the power of gold to remedy. These
considerations I urged to my beloved partner, and by enforcing them
endeavoured to remove those gloomy apprehensions, from the prevalence
of which I feared much injury to her health. There was another
circumstance I was led particularly to insist on; I mean the nature of
the secret intrusted to me.

“I admire your discernment and ingenuity, Marguerite,” said I, “in your
conjecture respecting the source of my wealth. I admire your delicacy
in not pressing me to decide upon the truth of your conjecture. This
only I must be permitted to say on that subject. It is a secret; and
you will perceive that the same reasons, whatever they are, which make
that secret obligatory on me, require that it should be respected by
you. The same evils that my own indiscretion may draw on me, I shall
be equally exposed to by any error or miscalculation of yours. I
have therefore most earnestly and solemnly to conjure you, whatever
misfortunes may hereafter befall me, in whatever perilous situation I
may be involved, that you will never utter a syllable on this subject;
and that, as I am the selected depository of this secret, and alone
know with certainty what is its nature, you will trust our prosperity
in this point to me.”--Marguerite engaged to conduct herself as I
desired.

The night which succeeded this explanation, was particularly soothing
and grateful to me. I was relieved from a great and oppressive burthen.
I was conscious of that particular species of pleasure which arises
from the resolute discharge of an heroic duty. The peace I felt
within shed its gay and reviving beams upon all around me. Reconciled
to myself, I was filled with sanguine and agreeable visions of the
future. My mind obstinately rejected all dark and hateful presages.
I had intrusted myself and the direction of my conduct, as far as it
was possible, to that better pilot, under whose guidance, if I had
not avoided the rocks and quicksands of life, I had at least escaped
with little comparative injury. I felt therefore as if my domestic
enjoyments were restored, and the pleasures of my better years were
about to run over again their auspicious career. Not so Marguerite. She
was mild, gentle, and soothing. Displeasure and resentment towards me
were banished from her mind. She endeavoured to conquer her melancholy,
and to forget the wounds that had been so fatal to her hopes. But her
endeavours were fruitless. A fixed dejection clung to her heart: nor
could the generous sweetness that pervaded her manners hide from me
entirely what was passing in her bosom.

During this interval we had talked over the plan of our future
operations. Marguerite was exceedingly urgent with me to quit
Constance; nor did I, though not impressed with her presentiments,
feel any reluctance to that change of scene, which, I believed, would
materially contribute to the serenity of her mind and the restoration
of her health. We determined on some of the cities of Italy as the next
place of our residence, and, fixed, if possible, to set out some time
in the next day or the day after. The plan of proceeding to France,
which had lately been a favourite with me, was a favourite no longer.
That had been the project of cheerful and wanton prosperity. It had
had for its object the re-establishment of my family honours, and the
elevation of my son. Now my son was lost, my wife was oppressed with
languor and disease, my house was overwhelmed with sorrow. This was no
time for wantonness and triumph. If I could ever hope to resume the
plans my frolic fancy had sketched, an interval at least of soberer hue
must first be suffered to elapse.

My mind at this time sustained a revolution sufficiently remarkable,
but of which the urgency of events that immediately succeeded prevented
me from ever ascertaining whether it would have proved temporary or
permanent. When I first received the donation of the stranger, my
thoughts, as I have already said, were in a state of enthusiastic
transport; and, amidst the golden visions in which my fancy revelled,
I became in a considerable degree alienated from domestic sentiments
and pleasures. If I still loved my wife and children, it was the love
of habit rather than sympathy; more an anxiety for their prosperous
success in the world, than an earnest craving for their presence and
intercourse. This state of intoxication and rapture had now subsided.
The events of the few last weeks had sobered my thoughts. Having lost
my son, and being threatened with the loss of his mother, I was roused
to a sense of their value. The influx of wealth and supernatural gifts
had grown familiar to my mind, and now only occupied the back-ground
of the picture. I was once more a man, and I hoped to partake of the
privileges and advantages of a man. The fate reserved for these hopes
will speedily be seen.

Some readers will perhaps ask me why, anxious as I was for the life of
Marguerite, and visible as was the decline of her health, I did not
administer to her of the elixir of immortality which was one of my
peculiar endowments. Such readers I have only to remind, that the pivot
upon which the history I am composing turns, is a mystery. If they will
not accept of my communication upon my own terms, they must lay aside
my book. I am engaged in relating the incidents of my life; I have no
intention to furnish the remotest hint respecting the science of which
I am the depository. That science affords abundant reasons why the
elixir in question might not, or rather could not, be imbibed by any
other than an adept.




CHAPTER XX.


The morning after my return to my family, as I sat surrounded with my
girls, and endeavouring to make myself their playmate and companion,
certain officers of justice belonging to the supreme tribunal of the
city entered my apartment. They were sent, as they informed me, to
conduct me to prison. My blood at this intelligence mounted into my
face.

“To prison?” cried I--“wherefore?--what have I done?--I am no citizen
of your state. What is the charge against me? Lead me not to prison:
lead me to your chief magistrate!”

“You will be called up for examination, when his honour is at leisure
to hear you: in the mean time you must go to prison.”

“Do those who sent you know that I am a native and a gentleman of
France? They will be made to repent this insolence. Upon what pretence
do they dare to act thus?”

“You will please not to talk of insolence to us. If you do not demean
yourself quietly----”

“Silence, fellow!” answered I fiercely. “Lead the way!”

By this time the children, astonished at a scene so alarming and
unintelligible to them, began to express their terror in various ways.
Julia, who was ready to faint, occupied the attention of her mother.
The little Marguerite clung round my knees, and expressed her emotions
by shrieks and cries. To see her father about to be torn from her by
four strangers, the peculiarity of whose garb of office aggravated
the rudeness of their countenances and the peremptoriness of their
behaviour, was a spectacle which the affectionateness of her nature was
unable to endure.

“I will go with you presently,” said I to the officers. “See, how you
have terrified the children!”

“Nay, sir, if you will behave civilly, and make it worth our while, we
do not desire to hurry you.”

I was stung with the brutal assurance with which they thus set the
liberty of a few moments at a price to me. But I checked my impatience.
I felt that it would be both foolish and degrading to enter into
contention with such wretches. I turned from them proudly, and took my
child in my arms.

“I will not be long gone, my love!” said I. “These people have made a
mistake, and I shall soon be able to rectify it.”

“I fancy not,” muttered one of them surlily.

“They shall not take you away, papa; that they shall not! I will hold
you, and will not let you go!”

“You are a good girl, Marguerite! But I know best what is proper, and
you must not think to control me. The men will not do me any harm,
child; they dare not. Perhaps I shall be back to dinner, and mamma will
then tell me how good you have been.”

As I spoke, she looked steadfastly in my face; and then, flinging her
arms round my neck, cried, “Good-by, papa!” and burst into a flood of
tears.

I embraced the other children and their mother; and, saying to the
latter significantly, “Fear nothing; you know I have nothing to
fear!”--departed with my conductors.

The way to the citadel lay through the market-place. The scene was
already crowded; and I had the mortification to be led along as a
criminal, in the midst of a thousand gazing eyes and enquiring tongues.
New as every thing connected with my present situation was to me, I had
not anticipated this vexation. I was stung with shame and impatience.
“To my dungeon!” said I to my conductors sternly. “If you had shown
yourself better humoured,” cried the most brutal of them, “we would
have led you round by the back way.”

The master of the prison was somewhat less a savage than his officers.
He knew my person, and had heard of my wealth. “Does monsieur choose
the best apartment?” said he. “Any where that I can be alone!” answered
I hastily. He hesitated a moment. I looked in his face: “Oh, yes, you
will be paid!” He bowed, and showed me to a room.

I shut the door as he retired. What had happened to me was of little
importance in itself. The impertinence of bailiffs and thief-takers
is of no more real moment than the stinging of a gnat. But I was so
utterly unacquainted with scenes of this nature! The pride of rank
that swelled within me made every appearance of restraint galling to
my sense. From the instant I was able to write, man, no one, except
in the voluntary compact of military service, had ever said to me, Go
there! or, Do this! And now, was I to be directed by the very refuse
of the species? Was I to learn the prudence of not replying to their
insults? Was I to purchase, at a stipulated price, their patience and
forbearance?--I request the reader to pardon me for troubling him with
my noviciate feelings: I soon learned to understand the world--the
world of a prison--better!

But, what was of more importance, I was apprehended as a criminal:
I had been dragged a prisoner of justice through the streets of
Constance; I was, by and by, to be subjected to the interrogatories
of the municipal tribunal. I could scarcely credit my senses, that
such an indignity had happened to the blood of St. Leon. It is true,
I was innocent. I was conscious, whatever might be my imprudences
and offences towards my own family, that I had done nothing to merit
the animadversion of public justice. But this was of no consequence.
Nothing, in my opinion, could wipe away the disgrace of being
interrogated, examined! of having for an instant imputed to me the
possibility of being a criminal! I writhed under this dishonour, and
felt it as a severer attack than the question, which was comparatively
of ceremony and etiquette, that had oppressed me in my residence at
Dresden.

The next day, when I was brought up for examination, I had expected
to be the complainant, in demanding redress for the injury I had
sustained. But I was mistaken.

I entered the room haughtily, and with the air of a man that felt
himself aggrieved. Of this however the magistrate took no notice. “Do
you know, sir,” said I, “that I am a citizen and a gentleman of France?
Are you acquainted with the treatment I have experienced? Have you lent
your authority to that treatment?”

“Wait a few minutes,” replied he with an imperious tone, “and I shall
be at leisure to attend to you.”

I was silent. After the interval of nearly a quarter of an hour, he
resumed--

“You call yourself the count de St. Leon!”

“I do.”

“Perhaps, sir, you are uninformed of the purity with which justice is
administered in the city within whose jurisdiction you now stand. Our
state is a small one, and its magistrates are therefore enabled to
discharge the office of a parent, not only to its proper citizens, but
to all strangers that place themselves under its protection.”

“I remember, sir, that seven years ago, I and my wife and four
children, sick and unfriended, were upon the point of perishing with
hunger within the walls of this city!”--The fact I mentioned was wholly
foreign to the point with which I was at present concerned; but the
parading arrogance of the man brought it forcibly to my memory, and
wrung it from my lips.

“_Monsieur le comte_,” replied he, “you are petulant. It is not the
office of a state to feed the souls it contains; it could not do that
without making them slaves. Its proper concern is to maintain them in
that security and freedom of action, which may best enable them to
support themselves.”

I suppressed the emotions which the tone of this speech excited. I
was unwilling to enter into contention with a man whom I regarded as
inexpressibly my inferior.

“Is it,” cried I sternly, “a part of the justice you boast of, to drag
a man of rank and a stranger from his home, without any intimation of
the cause of his being so treated, and then, instead of investigating
immediately the charge against him, to send him to prison unheard?
I disdain to mention the behaviour of your officers: those things
naturally grow out of the abuses practised by their superiors.”

“The mode of our proceeding,” replied he, “depends upon the seriousness
of the crime imputed. If a man of distinction labours under a slight
accusation only, we then treat him with all proper forbearance and
respect. But, when he is suspected of a crime of more than ordinary
magnitude, that alters the case. The man who has ceased to respect
himself, must look for no respect from others.”

I was for a moment thunderstruck and speechless. At length fiercely I
cried, “Produce my accusers!”

“That is not the mode of proceeding in Constance. I have certain
questions to propound to you. When you have answered them, we shall see
what is to be done next.”

“Carry me before the prince-bishop of your city! If I am to be examined
further, let it be by your sovereign!”

“The prince-bishop, moved by the state of our affairs in matters of
religion, has been prevailed on to delegate his juridical authority.
I am the person to whom the cognisance of your business belongs; and
at certain times, aided by my assessors, have the power of life and
death within this city. You have had every indulgence to which you are
entitled, and it will be your wisdom to be no further refractory.”

“Propose your questions!”

“A person, apparently greatly advanced in years, arrived in the
autumn of last year at a miserable farm you at that time cultivated,
called the Cottage of the Lake. It is to him that my questions will
principally relate.”

I stood aghast. The words of the magistrate were most unwelcome sounds.
I remembered that the stranger had said to me, “When I am once buried,
speak of me, and, if possible, think of me no more.” I replied with
eagerness and alarm--

“Of that person I have nothing to say. Spare your questions: I have no
answer to return you!”

“What was his name?”

“I know not.”

“His country?”

“I cannot inform you.”

“It is understood that he died, or in some manner disappeared, while
under your protection. Yet in the registers of the church there is no
notice of that event. If he died, no application was made for the rites
of religion to him dying, or to his body when his spirit had deserted
it. You are required to answer, what became of him or his remains?”

“I have already told you, that from me you will obtain no information.”

“One question more, sir. Seven years ago, you tell me, you and your
family were perishing with hunger. Soon after, you removed from obscure
lodgings in this city to the cottage of the lake, and seemed to be
laudably employed in earning for yourself a scanty livelihood with
the labour of your hands. But within the last six months the scene is
wholly changed. You appear to have suddenly grown rich, and here, and
in other parts of Germany, have actually disbursed considerable sums.
Whence comes this change?”

The train of questions thus proposed to me, impelled me to a serious
reply.

“_Monsieur le juge_,” said I, “I am a stranger, a native of France, and
a man of rank in my own country. I have paid your state the compliment
of choosing it for my residence. I have expended my industry, I expend
my wealth among you. I have comported myself as a peaceable inhabitant.
No action of my life has brought scandal upon your state, or disturbed
the peace and tranquillity of your affairs. I cannot collect from
any thing you have said, that I have any accuser, or that any charge
has been alleged against me. Till that happens, I cannot fall under
your animadversion. I am a man of generous birth and honourable
sentiments. To myself and my own conscience only am I accountable for
my expenditure and my income. I disdain to answer to any tribunal on
earth an enquiry of this sort. And now, sir, in conclusion, what I
demand of you is, first, my liberty; and secondly, an ample reparation
for the interruption I have sustained, and the insults to which I have
causelessly been exposed.”

“You are mistaken, sir,” said the magistrate. “What you mention may
be the rule of administering justice in some states. They may decide,
if they think proper, that some open act, apparently of a criminal
description, must be alleged against a man, before he can become an
object of animadversion to the state. But in Constance, as I have
already told you, the government assumes to act the part of a parent
to its subjects. I sit here, not merely to investigate and examine
definite acts, but as a censor morum; and I should violate the oath
of my office, if I did not lend a vigilant attention to the behaviour
and conduct of every one within my jurisdiction. The city of Constance
requires that nothing immoral, licentious, or of suspicious character,
shall be transacted within its walls. Your proceedings have escaped
notice too long; much longer than they would have done but for your
late absence. In cases where what is committed is merely immoral or
licentious, we content ourselves with sending the offender out of our
walls. But your case is of a complicated nature. It has scandalised
all the inhabitants of our virtuous and religious city. Unless you
answer my enquiries, and give a clear and satisfactory account of your
wealth, I am bound to believe that there is something in the business
that will not bear the light. The coincidence of times obliges me to
connect the disappearance of your guest, and the sudden growth of your
fortune. This connection gives rise to the most alarming suspicions.
I have therefore to inform you that, unless you honourably clear up
these suspicions by the most ample communication, my duty directs me to
remand you to prison, and to assure you that you will not be liberated
thence till you have satisfied the whole of my interrogatories.”

“Think deliberately,” answered I, “of your decision before you form
it. Your prisons I despise; but I will not suffer my reputation and my
honour to be trifled with. I came before you willingly, though I could
easily have avoided doing so; because I was eager to clear my fame. I
expected accusers, and I knew I could confound accusation. But what is
this that you call justice? You put together circumstances in your own
mind: you form conjectures; and then, without information, accuser, or
oath, without the semblance of guilt, you condemn me to prison, and
expect to extort from me confession. In defect of articles of charge I
disdain to answer: the only return a man of honour should make to loose
conjectures and random calumnies is silence. I am descended from a race
of heroes, knights of the cross, and champions of France; and their
blood has not degenerated in my veins. I feel myself animated by the
soul of honour, and incapable of crime. I know my innocence, and I rest
upon it with confidence. Your vulgar citizens, habituated to none but
the groveling notions of traffic and barter, are not the peers of St.
Leon, nor able to comprehend the views and sentiments by which he is
guided.”

“You are mighty well-spoken, monsieur St. Leon,” replied the
magistrate, “and your words are big and sounding; but we know that the
devil can assume the form of an angel, and that the most infamous and
profligate character can pronounce with emphasis sentiments of the
purest virtue. You are pleased to decide that the presumptions against
you are nothing but calumnies. Is it nothing that, having received
a stranger and retained him with you for months, you endeavoured
to conceal this fact, and never suffered him to be seen by a human
creature? Is his final disappearance nothing? Is it nothing that,
supposing him to be dead, as he probably is, you denied to his remains
the rites of funeral, and refuse to tell what is become of the body?
Is it nothing that, upon the death of this stranger, you, who were
before in a state almost of penury, suddenly appear to be possessed of
unbounded riches? Where is the will of this stranger? In what archives
have you deposited the declaration of his wealth? Let me tell you,
sir, that these presumptions, which you call nothing, form a body of
circumstantial evidence that, in many countries, would have led you
to the scaffold as a murderer. But the laws of Constance, which you
audaciously revile, are the mildest in the universe. Here we never put
a man to death but on his own confession. We simply condemn him to
perpetual imprisonment, or until he makes a declaration of his guilt.
You refuse to declare the name or country of the man whom you are
suspected of murdering, and then have the assurance to boast that no
private accuser rises against you. No, sir, we know there can be no
private accuser, where the connections of the party can be successfully
concealed. But shall this concealment, which is an aggravation of the
murder, prove its security? In conclusion, you boast of your blood
and heroic sentiments, and rail at our citizens as shopkeepers and
merchants. Let me tell you, sir, shopkeepers and merchants though we
are, we should scorn to conduct ourselves in the obscure and suspicious
manner that you have done. And, now I have taken the trouble to refute
your flimsy pretences, which it was wholly unnecessary for me to do, I
have done with you. You know your destination, unless you are prepared
immediately to give a satisfactory account of yourself and your
proceedings.”

Finding it impossible to make on this man the impression I desired,
I declined entering into further parley; and, telling him that I
should convey a representation of my case to my native sovereign, and
did not doubt soon to make him feel the rashness of his proceeding,
I withdrew, in the custody of the officers who had conducted me to
the scene of audience. I was, I confess, struck with the coincidence
of circumstances, which the magistrate had placed in a fight equally
unexpected and forcible, and which I now saw calculated to subject me
to the most injurious suspicions. I was not disposed in the smallest
degree to yield to the attack, but I felt a desire to act deliberately
and with caution. The whole of what I had heard was utterly unforeseen,
and it was with peculiar anguish that I became aware of this new
consequence of the stranger’s pernicious donation. This was a
consequence that no resignation, no abjuration of his bequests could
cure; and that must be stood up to with manly courage, if any hope were
entertained of averting it.




CHAPTER XXI.


The appearance of wealth that accompanied me had by this time made
its impression upon my keepers; and one of them now informed me, that
monsieur Monluc, an agent of the court of France, who was making
a tour of several of the German states by order of his sovereign,
had arrived the night before at the city of Constance. There was no
representative of my country regularly resident here, and I immediately
felt the presence of Monluc to be the most fortunate event that could
have occurred for effecting my honourable deliverance. Selfishness and
avarice, it may be thought, would rather have impelled the persons
who had me in custody to conceal from me a circumstance calculated to
deprive them of an advantageous prey. But in those groveling souls
from whom riches never fail to extort homage, however strange it may
seem, the homage often appears disinterested. They pay it by a sort
of irresistible instinct; and, admiring what they covet, at an awful
distance, with difficulty assume the courage to pollute their worship
with ideas of calculation and gain.

I immediately addressed a memorial to this gallant soldier, with
whose person indeed I was unacquainted, but the fame of whose spirit
and enterprise had not failed to have reached me. I represented to
him that I was a Frenchman of family and distinction; that I had
been seized upon and was retained in prison by the magistrates here,
without accuser or the hope of a trial; that I had not been guilty of
the shadow of a crime; and that I knew the benignity and courage of
my sovereign would never permit a subject of France to languish under
calumny and oppression in a foreign country. I added, that he would
do an acceptable service to king Francis, to whom I had the honour to
be known, by interfering in my favour; and therefore entreated him to
obtain for me immediate justice and deliverance. Monluc returned me an
answer by the bearer of my memorial, assuring me that he would lose no
time in enquiring into the merits of my case, and that I might depend
upon receiving every assistance from him that a man of honour could
desire.

The warmth and frankness of this answer filled me with hope, for there
was no deliverance from my present situation that I could contemplate
with satisfaction, but such a one as should be accompanied with
reparation and _éclat_. Three days however elapsed before I heard
again from the French envoy. On the morning of the fourth he announced
his intention of visiting me; and, about an hour after, arrived at
the prison. His appearance was striking. He was tall, slender, and
well made, with a freedom of carriage, not derived from the polish
of courts, but which appeared to flow from the manliness and active
energies of his mind. His hair and complexion were dark; the former,
though he was still young, rather scantily shaded a high and ample
forehead. His features were expressive of the sanguine and adust temper
of his mind; and, though his eye was animated, his countenance, as he
entered, struck me as particularly solemn.

“You are the count de St. Leon?” said he.

“I am.”

“You sent me a memorial a few days ago complaining of the tribunal of
this city: I am afraid, sir, I can do nothing for you.”

My countenance fell as he spoke; I gasped for breath. I had conceived a
most favourable anticipation as he entered, and my disappointment was
particularly cruel. I had said in my heart, This is the very man to
rescue my injured fame.

“I see, sir, you are disappointed,” resumed he. “I have not given
up the affair: if I had, this visit, which I design as a mark of
attention, would be an insult. The moment I received your memorial, I
paid the utmost regard to it. If the affair had been as you represented
it, I know I could not do any thing more acceptable to my sovereign
than interfere in your behalf. I have spent the whole interval in
investigating the case. I have seen the magistrate who committed you;
I have visited the spot where your crime is alleged to have been
perpetrated; I have had an interview with your wife.”

“Well, sir,” cried I, alarmed and impatient--“well, sir, and the
result?”

“Appearances are uncommonly strong against you: they can scarcely he
stronger. But you have a right to be heard; it is for the sake of
discharging that last act of justice that you see me this morning.”

“Great God!” exclaimed I, overwhelmed with chagrin, “is if possible
that my countryman, the man to whom I was proud and happy to appeal,
the gallant Monluc, should believe me a murderer? I swear by every
thing that is sacred, by the blood of him that died for me on the
cross, and by my eternal salvation, that I am as innocent as the child
unborn!”

“I am glad to hear you express yourself with this emphasis and fervour.
I cannot but say that to my own feelings it has great weight. But I
must not suffer myself as a man, and still less in the public capacity
in which I stand, to be overcome and confounded by your asseverations.
There is a connected and most unfavourable story against you: this it
is incumbent on you to clear up.”

“And you say, you have seen my wife?” I was distracted and overwhelmed
by Monluc’s way of putting the question. I was divided between my
anxiety to be justified, and the solemn mystery of the affair to which
his enquiries led; and I probably spoke thus from an unconscious desire
to gain time.

“Yes, that is another presumption in your favour. Madame de St. Leon
is perhaps the most striking and extraordinary woman I ever saw. Of
the husband of such a woman, especially when he appears to be the
object of her attachment, I should be always inclined to think well.
Madame de St. Leon pleaded for you with earnestness and affection.
But, amidst all her ardour, I could perceive that she felt there was
something mysterious and unpleasant in the affair, that she was unable
to develope.”

As Monluc spoke, I saw that I had failed in one of the main anchors
of my hope. I thought that no one could have talked with my beloved
Marguerite, and have left her with the opinion that I was a murderer.
How did this happen? Was she lukewarm and unfaithful in my vindication?

“What she,” continued my countryman, “I could see, was not only unable
to explain, but did not fully understand, it is you alone can clear;
the concealment of the stranger, his disappearance, what became of the
body, and your own sudden transition from poverty to wealth.”

I was by this time fully sensible of the nature of my situation. I
summoned my fortitude; I felt that I had no longer any hope but in the
dignity of innocence.

“You call on me for explanation,” replied I. “Can you not conceive,
gallant Monluc, that I may be able to resolve your doubts, and yet
that I will not? Explanation is not the business of a man of honour.
He cannot stoop to it. He will win the applause and approbation of
mankind, if won, in silence. He will hold on the even course of a
generous spirit, and turn neither to the right nor to the left, to
court the suffrage, or deprecate the condemnation of a giddy multitude.
Such, my brave countryman, have been the maxims of my past life; such
will be the maxims of my future.”

“I admire,” answered Monluc, “at least the gallantry of these
sentiments, though I may be inclined to doubt their prudence. But, if
such is your determination, permit me to say, you have no concern with
me. He who resolutely withholds explanation, must arm himself with
patience, and either wait the operation of time, or rest satisfied with
the consciousness of his innocence.”

“And is that all? Will there not be some noble spirits, who, separating
themselves from the herd, will judge of him by what they feel in their
own breasts, and be drawn to him with an irresistible impulse? Was it
not natural that I should expect Monluc to be one of these? It would be
hard indeed, if he who disdains to temporise with popularity, and to
vindicate himself from the ungenerous constructions of sordid minds,
should not by that very proceeding secure the friendship and sympathy
of those, whose friendship it will be most grateful to him to possess.”

“The friends of an innocent man, whom a combination of circumstances
has exposed to the most painful suspicions, must always be few. He can
scarcely expect the acquittal and sympathy of a stranger. I must know,
I must have felt and observed in a man a thousand virtues, before
I can be entitled to treat accumulated presumptions against him as
nothing.”

“And thus then are to end my hopes in Monluc? He does not feel that I
am innocent? He does not recognise in me the countenance, the voice,
the turn of thought, of a brother, a man no less incapable than himself
of every thing disgraceful and ignominious? Be it so! I will, as you
advise me, rest upon the consciousness of my innocence. A Frenchman,
the descendant of illustrious ancestors, long an exile, long the victim
of adversity, but at all times conscious of the purity of my sentiments
and the integrity of my conduct, I will not suffer myself to be
overwhelmed with this last desertion, this ultimate refusal of justice!”

“Count de St. Leon! your appeal is full of energy. In whatever way
I decide, it will leave an unpleasant sensation in my breast. Let
us suppose that, as a private man, I could take you to my arms, and
dismiss every unfavourable appearance from my mind. You must remember
that I am here in a public character, and that only in a public
character am I capable of affording you assistance. Thus situated, I am
bound to resist the impulses of a romantic and irregular confidence,
and to do nothing of which I shall not be able to render a clear and
intelligible account.

“Let us not part thus! It is not the vindication of your character to
the world, with which we are at present concerned. It is only necessary
that you should furnish a sufficient ground to justify me to myself for
interfering in your behalf. Explain to me the particulars of your case,
in confidence if you will, but fully and without reserve. I will not
abuse your confidence. I will make no use of your communication, but
such as you shall yourself approve. Only enable me to have a reason for
acting, that is not merely capable of being felt, but that I may know
is in its own nature capable of being stated to another. It is upon me
that you call to take certain measures; you must enable me to judge of
their propriety.

“You are mistaken when you suppose the appearances against you to
be slight. It is not a slight circumstance, that you profess to
be ignorant of, or have refused to disclose, the country, the
connections, and even the name of the stranger whom you so anxiously
concealed. The disappearance of his body is still more extraordinary.
What intelligible motive, except a guilty one, can I assign for
that? But your sudden wealth immediately after this disappearance,
is especially material. It is a broad and glaring fact, that men
cannot shut their eyes on, if they would. The chain and combination
of events, that proceeds systematically from link to link, is the
criterion of guilt and the protector of reputation. Your case, as it
now stands, is scarcely to be termed equivocal: upon the supposition
of your criminality all is plain and easy to be accounted for; upon
any other supposition it appears an inscrutable mystery. Place but the
balance even; present to me an exposition of these facts, that shall
make your innocence not less probable than your guilt; and, as I feel
myself interested for you and your family, and as the presumption, when
matters are doubtful, ought always to be on the favourable side, I
consent to be your friend!”

“How unfortunate,” I exclaimed, “am I doomed to be! Your proposal is
liberal and generous; but I must refuse it! My story is an unhappy one:
particulars have been reposed in my fidelity, which I am not at liberty
to communicate, but which, if communicated, you would not regard as
dishonourable. I may be made the martyr of infamy, and the abhorrence
of my species; I can endure adversity and anguish; I can die; but that
which you demand from me never can be confided to any mortal ear!”

“As you please,” rejoined Monluc. “The secrets of a dead man, to be
preserved after his death, and that to the ruin of him who is their
depository, must, I believe, be villanous secrets; and the secret of a
villain no one is bound to observe. You must further give me leave to
tell you, that, whatever a high-strained sense of honour might dictate
in that point, the fortune you possess is your own affair, and to
dissipate or not the mystery which hangs upon that is wholly at your
discretion. But I have already advanced as far, perhaps further, than
circumstances or propriety could justify, and there can now be no more
parley between us.”

“Monluc,” cried I, “I submit! However harsh your decision is as towards
me, however painful and unfortunate its consequences, I will admit it
to be that which duty prescribes to you. I struggle, I contend, no
further. One thing only I would willingly obtain of you, that you would
interpose your influence to obtain for me the society and intercourse
of my family. The transaction of this day will then be remembered by
me with respect towards you, and a melancholy regret that I could not
entitle myself to your esteem. I shall recollect with pleasure that I
owe something to the generosity of Monluc.”

“Incredible pertinacity!” exclaimed my visitor, with a voice of
perplexity and astonishment. “What am I to conceive of you? Under what
appearance shall I consider you in the records of my memory? Your
silence is the indication of guilt, and in that indication I ought to
acquiesce. Yet the fortitude of your manner, and something, I know not
what, of emotion, that your manner produces in my own bosom, would
fain persuade me you are innocent. Why will you leave me a prey to
this contention of thought? If all men, constituted as I am, were to
feel in you, as it were, the magnetism of innocence, shame, the simple
inference of understanding, and the general sense of mankind, would
oblige them to treat you as guilty. What I can however, be assured I
will cheerfully do for you. I cannot deliver you from prison, but I
will not fail to obtain the mitigation you ask. Farewell!”

Such was the issue of my interview with Monluc. It was clear that my
reputation was wounded beyond the power of remedy. While the question
had only been of a magistrate, haughty, supercilious, insolent and
unfeeling, I flattered myself that the harshness of the conclusions
that were drawn, might be ascribed to the depravity of his character.
But Monluc was the reverse of this man. He was not less generous and
heroic than the magistrate was gross and illiberal. His desire to
relieve me was not less apparent than the magistrate’s eagerness to
oppress. Yet his conclusion was the same, and was felt by me so much
the more bitterly, in proportion to the humanity, the kindness, the
intrepidity, and the virtue, of the man from whom it flowed. Virtue
and vice, barbarism and refinement, were equally engaged in the concert
against me, and there was no chance I should triumph in a contention
with so many enemies.

I might now be said to have reached the end of my adventure: I had
closed one grand experiment upon the donation of the stranger. What
had it produced to me? Not one atom of the benefits I anticipated; not
a particle of those advantages which a little while ago had made the
intoxications of my waking dreams. Its fruits had been distasteful and
loathsome. Whether I looked to my person, my family, or my fame, I had
felt in all the miserable effects of this treacherous and delusive
gift. My person was shut up in prison; and I was now to make an
experiment whether, by clandestine and secret proceedings, wealth could
restore to me the liberty of which wealth had deprived me. My family
was blasted; my wife was struck to the heart, and no mortal skill
could restore the wound she had suffered; my son was gone unaided into
voluntary exile, that he might shun the contagion of my follies; what
was I to do with the poor remains of my house, forlorn, dejected, and
wretched? The wound my good name had received, was of the most decisive
species. When I first encountered contumely at Dresden, and was called
on for explanation by Coligny, the difficulties of my condition struck
anguish to my soul. But what were they, compared with what had now
overtaken me? I was charged with robbery and murder, with every thing
that combines the whole species against the perpetrator, and determines
them, without sense of compunction, to extirpate him from the face of
the earth. Perhaps it was only by the courtesy of the laws of this
state, that I was permitted my choice between an ignominious death
and perpetual imprisonment. I might possibly indeed escape from my
confinement; I might pass into a distant country; I might be fortunate
enough to cut off all connection between my past and my future life,
and thus enter upon a new career. But this to a man of honourable
mind is a miserable expedient. With what feelings does he recollect,
that there is a spot where his name is abhorred, where a story is
told against him to excite the wonder of the ignorant, and the torpid
feelings of the sluggish soul, a story to darken with new infamy the
records of guilt, and to infect the imagination of the solitary man
with nameless horrors? To be the theme of such a tale, is no common
evil. No matter how far the man to whom it relates, shall remove from
the detested spot; the spot itself with all its chain of circumstances,
will often recur; the voices that repulsed and humbled him will ring
in his ear; the degraded figure he made will rise for ever fresh to
his imagination. He cannot ascend to any free and lofty sentiment; he
cannot attain the healthful tone of unblemished virtue; wherever he
goes, he carries the arrow of disgrace in his bosom, and, when he would
erect his head on high, it reminds him of the past, and stings him to
the heart.

If the consciousness of all this would have been painful to any other
man, what was it to me, who had been brought up from my infancy in
the opinion that fame was the first of all human possessions, and to
whom honour and an unimpeached integrity had ever been more necessary
than my daily food, or than the life which that food supported? What
would I not have given could I have returned to the situation in
which the inauspicious arrival of the stranger had found me? But that
was impossible. If all that I had recently passed through could but
have proved a dream, if I could have awakened and freed myself from
the phantoms of this horrible vision, how happy beyond all names of
happiness should I by such an event have been made! What a lesson would
it have taught me of the emptiness and futility of human wishes! What a
sovereign contempt would it have impressed upon me for wealth and all
its train of ostentation! How profound a feeling of contentment with
humble circumstances and a narrow station would it have produced in my
mind! Alas, the conception of those advantages and that peace was the
illusion, and not the evils I had sustained, and from which I could not
escape!




CHAPTER XXII.


Meanwhile it was necessary that I should make the best of the present
circumstances. My heart was wounded; my spirit was in a manner broken;
but not so utterly withered and destroyed as to make me rest supine in
perpetual imprisonment. I felt with equal conviction and pungency that
my character and my happiness had sustained the deepest injuries; but
I felt it incumbent on me to collect and improve the fragments that
remained. For some days indeed after the conference with Monluc, I
was sunk in the deepest dejection. But, as that dejection subsided, I
began to turn a steady attention upon the future. I recollected that
an eternal and inexhaustible gift deserved to be made the subject
of more than one experiment, before a decision was formed upon its
merits. I shall become wiser, said I, as I go forward. Experience,
however bitter, will teach me sagacity and discrimination. My next
experiment shall be made with more prudence and a soberer gradation.
I will remove to some distant country, where the disadvantages of my
past adventures shall not follow me. I will take a new name. I shall
then enjoy the benefit of a tyro just entering a scene, to all the
personages of which he is wholly unknown. I shall be like a serpent
that has stripped its tarnished and wrinkled skin, and comes forth in
all the gloss and sleekness of youth. Surely, in an unknown land, with
the prejudice of wealth in my favour, and no prejudices against me, I
shall know how to conduct myself so as to obtain honour and respect.
It is impossible that inexhaustible wealth and immortal youth, gifts
so earnestly coveted by every creature that lives, gifts which if I
were known to possess, my whole species from the mere impulses of envy
would probably combine to murder me, as not able to endure the sight of
one so elevated above his brethren,--it is impossible that such gifts
should not be pregnant with variety of joy.

Marguerite greatly contributed to raise me from the dejection, into
which my imprisonment and the conference of Monluc had sunk me. She
was my better genius. I had been so accustomed to receive consolation
from her lips in the most trying circumstances, that now the very
sound of her voice was able to smooth my wrinkled brow, and calm my
agitated spirit. I listened as to the sound of an angelic lyre; I
was all ear; I drank in the accents of her tongue; and, in the dear
delight, my cares were hushed, and my sorrows at an end. She talked to
me of her daughters, whom she represented as about to have no protector
but their father; she urged me to watch over them, and to take such
steps as should most conduce to their future virtue and happiness;
she pointed out the practicability of escape, and recommended to me
to fly to some distant country: the dreams of future prosperity from
the gifts of the stranger were not hers; they were all my own. It was
inexpressibly affecting at this time to receive consolation from her,
who had no consolation in her own breast, who had bid farewell to all
the gay attractions of the world, and talked familiarly of her death as
a thing certain to happen in no very long time. She had lost the purest
gratifications of the domestic scene; she had lost her son; her heart
was broken; yet with her dying accents she sought to dispel retrospect,
and inspire cheerfulness, in the breast of her husband.

The reader may perhaps imagine that I was something too sanguine,
when, surrounded with jailors and all the precautions of a prison, I
planned the nature and scene of my next residence exactly as if I had
been a person at large. But I took it for granted that the power of
money I possessed would easily unlock to me the gates of my captivity.
I believed that, upon the lowest calculation, personal liberty was
clearly included among the gifts of the stranger. Impressed with this
opinion, I fixed upon a negro, a servant of the prison, and who had the
keys of my apartment, as the subject of my pecuniary experiment. The
idea of applying to him had perhaps first occurred to me, from the mere
circumstance of my seeing him more frequently than any other attendant
of the prison. When I thought further of the matter, I judged, from
the meanness of his rank and his apparent poverty, that I could not
have chosen better. So far as related to the sum to be paid as the
price of my liberty, it was indeed indifferent to me, whether it were
large or small. I had however suffered so much from the inconsiderate
lavishing of wealth, that I had no inclination on the present occasion
to make ostentation of more than was necessary. But, what was of most
importance to me, I was desirous that my first experiment should be a
successful one. Though not unaware of the power of gold, I conceived
that, among persons of middling rank and easier circumstances, there
might be varieties of disposition, and I might be mistaken in my
choice. Some might have the whim of integrity, or might place a sturdy
sort of pride in showing that they were content with what they had,
and were too high for a bribe. There might be persons who, though of
plebeian rank, might value reputation as much as ever I had done, and
be of opinion that no advance of station could compensate for the name
or the consciousness of dishonour. These distinctions may seem an idle
and superfluous refinement, when it is considered that I had the power
of raising my bribe to the level of any man’s honesty or pride, be it
as great as it might; and it may be thought that my offer might be so
increased as to be too dazzling for mortal firmness to resist. Be that
as it will, I am merely stating the reflections that passed through my
mind, not entering into their vindication.

Taking the first opportunity then of accosting this man when he was
alone with me, I addressed him thus:--

“My good friend, are not you poor?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Would not you readily do me a kindness?”

“If my master give me leave, I will.”

“You mistake me. Would you be my friend?”

“I do not know what you mean, sir. I have been used to call the man I
love my friend. If you mean that, you know I cannot choose whether I
will be a man’s friend; it comes of itself.”

“Can I not make you my friend?”

“That is, make me love you?”

I was surprised at the propriety of his answers. I am unable at this
distance of time to recall the defects of his language: and I disdain
the mimic toil of inventing a jargon for him suitable to the lowness
of his condition: the sense of what he said I faithfully report. I had
before been struck with a certain correctness of thinking in him; but
I now examined his countenance more attentively than I had ever before
done, and thought I could distinctly trace in it the indications of a
sound understanding and an excellent heart.

“I do not know, sir,” continued he. “If I see that you are a good man,
I believe I shall love you. But if it happened that you were good and
generous to me, I am sure I should love you very much.”

“You are very poor?”

“So they tell me. I never had more than a shilling or two at a time in
my life.”

“It is a very sad thing to be poor?”

“Why, yes, so I have heard, sir. But, for my own part, I am always
merry and gay.”

“My good fellow, I will make you rich.”

“Thank you, sir! But what good will that do me?”

“You are a servant: I will make you a master of servants.”

“Now, that I should not like at all. I am merry, because I am
light-hearted. If I had money, and property to take care of, and
servants to direct, I am afraid they would make me grave and
suspicious, and in every respect unlike what you see me.”

“Is it possible you should be pleased with your present situation,
under the orders of one man in a house, and obliged to play the tyrant
to the rest?”

“Why, as you say, sir, there may be more agreeable situations than the
life of a jail. But, as to being under orders, I have no objection to
that. I never knew any other condition, and therefore I am contented.
It is not pleasant indeed to have a master who is always scolding and
dissatisfied; but the gentleman I serve at present is reasonable; I
know how to content him, and, when I have done that, he leaves me to
please myself. You offer me money: now, sir, that is not what I call
being generous; I count nothing for much, except when a man shows me
has bowels, and convinces me that he thinks justice due even to a
negro. I dare say however you designed it for generosity, and expected
something from me in return. Tell me what it is you want, and whatever
I can do with propriety, you may depend on it I will.”

“Do you approve of a man’s being deprived of his liberty?”

“Will you please to tell me what you mean by liberty? You offered me
just now what you called liberty and independence; and I am content to
be a servant.”

“Would you be pleased, instead of being a turnkey, to have the key
turned on yourself?”

“That I should not. I understand the disagreeableness of that well
enough, for when I first entered this place, it was as a prisoner.”

“If then, my good fellow, you were convinced that I was a man disposed
to be generous to you in your own way, and to deserve your attachment
and love, surely you would not refuse to deliver me from a situation
which you have yourself felt to be so disagreeable and calamitous.”

“I understand you now, sir. I have already a master with whom I am
satisfied, and I do not wish to change my service. When I was a
prisoner, he found out that I was innocent; he got me cleared, and
gave me employment. I am put here for the express purpose of seeing
the prisoners in safe custody. That is the contract between me and my
master. When I took the keys, by that action I pledged myself to be
faithful to my trust; and the nobleness of my master’s behaviour to me
in removing me from being a prisoner to be a free servant, is a double
bond upon my fidelity. I would sooner consent to be torn limb from
limb, than fail in what is expected from me. You may be generous to a
harmless stranger; you have most reason to be generous to a man you
love; but, if you would heap benefits upon me merely because I proved
myself a villain, I can only say it would be disgraceful to be the
object of your favour.”

Thus saying, he quitted me, and withdrew from further parley. The
conversation in which we had engaged, though I had had considerable
experience in the world, was altogether new to me, and overwhelmed
me with astonishment. I found in this trial, that the power of
money was subject to limitations, of which previously I had not been
in the slightest degree aware. I thought that nothing but the most
extraordinary degree of resolution and self-denial could enable a man
to resist its enticements; and I had even been told, though I did
not believe, that every man had his price, and a bribe capable of
indefinite augmentation must be in all cases victorious. Yet here was
a poor creature utterly exempt from its operation. He had no sense of
those attractions, which so often degrade the best, and convert virtue
into the most shameless profligacy. It cost him no effort to be honest,
and he uttered sentiments that would have given lustre to the most
heroic character, without any consciousness of their greatness. What
I had seen, led me also to reflect on another singularity I discerned
in him. In the midst of the admirable, I had almost said the sublime,
integrity he discovered, (for is it not a criterion of the sublime
to be great without an effort?) he was destitute of knowledge, of
intellectual cultivation, and all those exquisite sensations that most
distinguish the man from the brute. He passed on quietly in the road
of ordinary life, and thought not of the ambition to be wise or great,
to be honoured by thousands, or a benefactor to ages yet unborn. Kings
might have confessed their inferiority to this man. But is he to be
regarded as the model of what a human creature should be wished to be?
Oh, no!

But the most memorable feeling impressed upon me by this conversation,
was a conviction of what I had been backward to confess, that knaves
were the persons to whose assistance and concert I must look, and that
I must be upon my guard against an honest man. No one was qualified to
be my coadjutor, till he had proved himself unworthy of all just and
honourable society. The friend I must seek, was a man whose very soul
melted at a bribe, whom money would seduce to perpetrate whatever his
judgment most abhorred. Honour and integrity in the most refined and
the rudest state, Monluc and the negro, both refused. It is impossible
to conceive a sensation more painful and humiliating, than was this
conviction to my mind.

I was not long at leisure for these reflections. In a few minutes the
master of the prison entered my apartment, and with him the negro whom
I had endeavoured to prevail on to assist in restoring me to liberty.
The master began to reproach me in very harsh terms for attempting to
seduce his servant from his duty, and asked me what sort of enjoyment
or satisfaction a man could have in life, if he could not depend
upon the people he put into his employment? To this I answered with
sternness, “that I should hold no debate about right and wrong with a
jailor; that he might depend upon it I would leave no stone unturned to
set myself free, and, what was more, that I would be free; and that,
for his part, it was his business to keep me if he could, but not to
insult me.” I therefore insisted upon his quitting the room.

“What use,” replied the fellow, “do you think now there is in putting
yourself in a passion? If I have not a right to speak to you, I know
what I have a right to do, put you in the strong room, and load you
with irons.”

I turned my back upon him. “And how came you,” said I to the negro, “to
go and betray me? I should have expected better things of you. If you
refused to serve me, at least you needed not have endeavoured to hurt
me.”

“I did nothing but my duty, sir. I have no wish to hurt you: but it is
my business, not merely to take care of my master’s interests myself,
but to see that they are not injured by any body else. If he was not
put on his guard, you might have been more successful with the next
turnkey you endeavoured to bribe.”

“You will find it more to your interest, monsieur,” interposed the
jailor, “to talk to me than to my servant. You are determined to be
free, you say. If that is the case, and it is to happen, who has so
good a right to benefit by your resolution as I have?”

My eyes were opened in a moment. I saw that the knave whose rigour and
sternness could not hold out against the warmth of a bribe, the friend
of whose assistance I was in want, stood before me.

“I do not wonder,” proceeded he, “that you preferred applying to one
of my servants. Their honesty must be expected to be had at a cheaper
market. But, for my part, I am determined that no man shall ever pass
these walls, without my being the richer. If then your escape is a
thing that must happen, let us see what you can afford to give me for
it.”

“Dear master,” interposed the negro, “you surely will not listen to the
gentleman’s offer. When I refused to betray my trust, it is impossible
you should consent to betray yours!”

“Hold your tongue, blockhead!” said the other. “Do not you see that
monsieur is determined to escape? I know he is rich. Though you have
refused a bribe, I am sure that all your fellows will not. The thing
will happen sooner or later in spite of every thing I can do; and there
can be no harm in my helping to bring about, what it is impossible I
should prevent.”

A morality like this seems exactly in its place in the breast of a
jailor. We had already made some progress in adjusting the terms of our
contract, when the keeper of the prison interposed:--

“But, monsieur, you will please to remark, that this is an affair which
will be attended with difficulty. Whatever passes between you and me
must be a secret. Your escape will be a thing open and notorious, and
you must have a confederate, that I may not bear the blame of it. You
must therefore take my black here along with you, that his flight may
cause all the blame to fall upon him.”

“O, pray, master,” said the negro, “do not part with me! I love you,
and will do any thing in the world, if you will let me stay. You saved
my life for aught I know, and made a man of me again; you cannot think
what good it does me to serve a master that has been so kind to me!”

“Get you gone!” replied his owner. “You are of no use to me; you are
not fit for a jail; you are so simple, I cannot tell what to do with
you!”

“Indeed I do not like to go with this gentleman; it will break my
heart. He said he would be generous and kind to me, if I turned a
villain; I shall never be able, and shall never desire to earn his
kindness: but you rewarded me because I was innocent. He said he would
make a master of me; and I am better as I am; I had much rather be a
servant.”

The difficulties of this poor fellow were soon silenced by the
peremptoriness of his master. The jailor told him that he would
do him a great service, by thus giving his master an opportunity
of representing him as the traitor; and, with this consideration,
the negro dried his tears, and with a reluctant heart consented to
accompany me. Thus were his exemplary fidelity and affection rewarded!
So little do some men seem capable of feeling the value of attachment!
The character of the master was a singular one. The meanness and
mercenariness of his spirit were unredeemed by a single virtue. He was
avarice personified. But he had found or imagined an interest in taking
this negro, who had been want only thrown into prison by a former
tyrant, for his servant; and this the poor fellow, in the simplicity of
his heart, had mistaken for an act of exalted generosity. His avarice
had swallowed up all his other passions; and his servants had neither
impatience nor insolence to encounter from him: weighed therefore
in the balance of the negro’s experience, he appeared a miracle of
mildness and benevolence.

Our bargain was at length concluded; and, the next time Marguerite
came to visit me, I announced to her the success of my negotiation.
Before we parted, we sent for the jailor, and discussed with him the
road I should take. My purpose was to pass into Italy; and Marguerite
undertook by midnight to have every thing prepared to convey us to
the foot of the mountains. This point being adjusted, the keeper of
the prison left us; and, tenderly embracing Marguerite, I besought
her to congratulate me upon the recovery of my liberty. She had heard
however of the infamous nature of the charge against me, and, though
she yielded it no credit, I could easily perceive that it rendered
yet heavier the depression under which she laboured. She returned
my embrace; the tears stole down her cheeks; but she was silent.
I endeavoured to divert her thoughts and re-animate her spirits,
by hinting at the new scenes before us, and the distant country to
which we were about to remove; but in vain. “I will not reproach you,
Reginald!” said she; “I will not desert my duty while I have power to
perform it; you may depend upon my doing every thing I am able both
for the children and yourself!”

She left me in a very melancholy frame of mind. I had not expected
to see her thus languid and disconsolate; and upon the eve of my
liberation, I felt it like caprice. Incomparable woman! She was
incapable of giving intentional pain: but, with her exquisitely
susceptible mind, she was unable to support the dreadful reverse in
which I had involved her, or even at times to assume the gestures of
cheerfulness and tranquillity; gestures that, at the best, but ill
disguised the grief within!

I was busily reflecting on what had just occurred, when the keeper of
the prison re-entered my apartment. “I am come, monsieur,” said he, “to
take my leave of you. As I do not at all intend to lose my place, it is
not proper that I should see you any more. You understand me?”

Two days had already elapsed since the conclusion of our contract, and
I had provided myself for this and such other demands as seemed likely
to be immediately impending. I should have preferred indeed to have
delayed this payment till the moment of my departure: but what the
jailor suggested appeared reasonable; and I could not assign, even to
my own mind, any cause why I should be reluctant to comply with it. I
paid to this wretch the price of his villany.

I now began to count the hours, and eagerly to anticipate the arrival
of midnight. Though the moment of my liberty was so near, I yet
contemplated with unspeakable loathing the scene of my confinement,
which was associated with the deepest disgrace and the blackest charges
that are incident to a human creature. I felt as if, in proportion as I
removed from the hated spot, I should at least shake off a part of the
burthen that oppressed me, and grow comparatively young again.

Time was far from moving indeed with the rapidity my impatience
required; but the hour of appointment at last was near, and I expected
every moment the faithful negro to appear, and announce to me my
freedom. The cathedral bell now sounded twelve; I heard the noise of
steps along the gallery; and presently a key was applied to the door
of my apartment. It opened; and three persons, whom I knew for servants
of the prison, entered.

“Come, sir,” said one of them; “you must follow me.”

“Where is my friend the negro?” said I.

“Ask no questions; speak never a word; but come.”

It was strange that the master of the prison, whose temper was so full
of anxiety and caution, should unnecessarily trust three of his people,
who might easily have been kept ignorant of this hazardous secret!
This circumstance however did not strike me at first so strongly as it
ought to have done. I had perfect confidence in his fidelity to his
profligate bargain, and expected every moment to meet the negro who was
to be my guide. My conductors led me by a way which I soon perceived
did not lead to the ordinary entrance of the prison.

“Where are we going?” said I.

“Hold your tongue, or you will spoil all;” replied one of them roughly.

I bethought me that there might be an objection to the dismissing me by
the public gate; I recollected to have heard that there were several
subterranean outlets to the citadel; I judged from the words I had
just heard that my conductors were acquainted with the plan that had
been formed; and for all these reasons I proceeded with tolerable ease
and security. I was not much longer however permitted to doubt. I was
conducted to one of the dungeons of the prison, and told that there I
was to remain. At first I remonstrated loudly, and told them “that I
had been promised my liberty, and not a treatment like this.”

“We know that, sir,” replied they, “and that is the reason you are
brought here. It is our business to teach you that the greatest offence
that can be committed by a man in prison is to attempt to escape.”

The shock and surprise that so unexpected an issue to my adventure
produced, rendered me outrageous. I was no longer able to control my
fury; and, without knowing what I proposed, I knocked down two of my
attendants before they had an opportunity to secure me, and rushed
up the flight of steps by which we had descended. The third however
contrived to intercept me; and, while we struggled, the other two came
to his assistance. They loaded me with fetters and chained me to the
wall. I was then left in utter darkness.

I felt myself sore with the bruises I had received in the contest;
but what was infinitely worse, I found the expectations of freedom I
had so confidently entertained, baffled and disappointed. Marguerite
and my children were at this moment waiting for me to join them. They
would probably wait hour after hour in vain. To what cause would they
attribute my failing of my appointment? To what cause was I myself to
attribute my miscarriage? My hopes in this instance had been in the
utmost degree sanguine; what was I to count upon for the future? Was
money useless in every instance in which mankind agreed to think its
power unquestionable? What was the source of the present catastrophe
and the harsh treatment I endured? Was the keeper of the prison
discovered, and dismissed from his office? Had the negro gone and given
information against him? I formed a thousand conjectures as to what
might have happened; but I was unable to rest in any.

I had remained about twelve hours in this situation, full of angry
and disconsolate thoughts, when the principal jailor entered my
dungeon. I looked at him with astonishment; the cloud vanished from my
understanding, and I began to comprehend the solution of the enigma.

“Are you at large?” cried I, with indignation: “why then am I here?”

“You are here by my orders.”

“Execrable villain!” said I. “Did you not promise me my freedom?
Have you not received the price of it? How dare you show yourself in
my presence?” As I spoke, I shook my chains, I clenched my fists, I
trembled with resentment and rage.

“If you are not perfectly quiet and reasonable,” said he, “I shall
leave you to your fate and return no more.”

Nothing is more singular in a state of great mental effervescence, than
the rapidity with which our ideas succeed each other. At such times we
seem to think more in minutes than at other times in hours. I felt
how miserable a slave a man is, the moment he falls completely into
the power of another. The wretch who stood before me was more vacant
of human affections than any one I ever saw. Yet I was his creature,
to be moulded as he pleased. A thousand injuries he could inflict upon
me, for which neither the institutions of society nor the extraordinary
endowments I derived from the stranger could afford a remedy. He might
so torture my mind and baffle my wishes, as to kill in me every spark
of lofty adventure and generous pride. My liberty might, for aught I
knew, be for years at his disposal. I felt however that my best course
was to regard him with contempt, and use him as I would a spade or
a file, to execute my purposes, without suffering him to awaken my
passions. I immediately grew more calm, and he perceived the revolution
of my sentiments.

“You seem to wonder,” continued he, “that I did not keep my engagement
with you? I pride myself upon being superior to the prejudices, by
which other men are frightened, like children with a bugbear. I have
therefore no rule but my interest: and I did not see how my interest
bound me to keep my engagement with you.”

“And what became of the countess?”

“I neither know nor care. I suppose she stayed all night under the
walls; I knew she durst not disturb the prison.”

I felt I had still emotions to suppress. I curbed my tongue, but they
showed themselves in my eyes.

“How do you intend to dispose of me?”

“Keep you in close custody. I have got your thousand pounds; the next
thing for me to take care of is, that I do not lose my place.”

“And for what purpose do you come to me now?”

“Why to tell you a secret, I have not quite determined what conduct
to pursue, and therefore I came here that I might have a better
opportunity of judging.”

“Are you not afraid that I should inform the government how you have
cheated me?”

“You inform! Have not I got you under lock and key? I warrant you, I
will take care what goes out of these walls to the government.”

“The countess has a licence to visit me.”

“What care I for that? I can keep her at bay as long as I will. She
will not easily go to the government; and she is not such a fool as
not to know, that to lodge a complaint against me, is not the way to
procure the liberty of a man condemned to perpetual imprisonment. I
can at any time trump up a story of your attempting to corrupt the
turnkeys, and be sure, when I do, I will not want for proofs. That will
cover any thing I can do to annoy you, and answer any accusation you
can make against me. Do you think that the word of a jailor will not be
taken, before that of the murderer he has in custody?”

“I can bring your own servants as witnesses, three of whom assaulted me
last night.”

“Dunce, do you think I trusted them with my secret? They have nothing
to tell, and apprehend nothing but a plot between you and my black,
who has been put into the penitentiary for his offence. He is my only
confident; and I trust him, because his stupidity answers to me for his
faith.”

“Suppose I were to double the bribe for which you sold me my liberty,
what security should I have that you would abide by your bargain?”

“Oh, if you were to do that, it would alter the case.”

“Might you not then detain the money, and defy me, as you have done
now?”

“Suppose that a thing which might happen: can you help yourself? can
you do better?”

I saw there was no remedy, and I was constrained to allow the success
of this twofold perfidy. It was with an ill grace, and an attempt at
sullenness and indifference, that the jailor accepted my proposal.
The second thousand however had irresistible charms; and, in spite of
himself, the sensation that made his heart dance, relaxed his muscles,
and played about his mouth. He was puzzled what to think of me. The
facility with which I produced the sums he demanded, with less apparent
effort than they might have come from a duke or a sovereign prince,
startled and staggered him. He had still his qualms, and evidently
doubted whether he should not raise his price a third time. I saw no
safety but in pertinacity and firmness, and had the good fortune
ultimately to check his doubtful, half-formed experiments.

I was led by the accidents which have just been related, into further
and deeper reflections on the power of money, as well as on the nature
of the situation in which I found myself placed by the legacy of the
stranger. My present experiment had been made upon a subject apparently
the most favourable that could have been devised, upon a man whose
breast the love of gold occupied without a rival: yet with this man
I very hardly succeeded. I was not indeed so blinded by the present
dejection of my spirit and sickness of my heart, as to imagine that I
had not a secure game with this base-minded wretch, if I consented to
play it. I had only to enlarge my bribe, to change it from the limited
sum of two thousand pounds to the more brilliant offer of two thousand
per annum, and no doubt I might have led him with me to the extremity
of the globe. However he might have demurred, however he might have
doubted, however curiosity, whetted even to agony by the goadings
of avarice, might have prompted him to an incessant enquiry within
himself as to the solution of my character and my powers, his grasping
spirit would infallibly have chained his tongue, and been surety for
his fidelity. But I could not yet prevail upon myself to endow such
groveling and noxious propensities with so rich a reward. I considered,
in the language of the stranger, that the talent I possessed was of the
most momentous nature, and bestowed by the governor of the universe for
the highest purposes; and I should have held myself unjustifiable in
enriching by its means, however urgent the necessity might appear, the
most worthless of mankind.

The sentiments of my tyrant varied every hour; he was fickle, anxious,
and undetermined; harassed with the double fear of losing the sum
already obtained, and of not securing the whole of what was capable
of being acquired. He parted with me at last with all the pangs of a
lover, who witnesses the ceremony of his mistress’s taking the monastic
veil, and being sundered from him for ever. I was his Fortunatus’s
purse, and this was the last day he was to enjoy the use of it; I was
to him as the buried treasure of some long-forgotten hoarder, and
he feared he should quit his digging before he had carried off every
thing that the field concealed. At length however he began to apprehend
that he had urged the refinement of an unprincipled avarice as far
as it would go; and therefore in a few days, the negro being already
discharged from his penance, he suffered us to escape together.




CHAPTER XXIII.


Having rejoined the remainder of my family, we set out together for
the plains of Italy. My first interview with Marguerite after my
return from Dresden had been melancholy. But our situation was now
such as to give additional anguish to her serious thoughts. She had
then regarded me as ambiguous, mysterious, and impenetrable, qualities
from which the frankness of her nature spontaneously revolted; she saw
in me the destroyer of her son, the idol of her heart; she believed
me an alchymist, a character which she viewed as base, degrading, and
insensible; she had heard that rumour had been busy with my fame. But
now she saw in me a man of blasted reputation, arraigned and imprisoned
for robbery and murder. She did not credit these imputations. But did
the ingenuous and noble-minded Marguerite de Damville ever think to
find herself allied to a being thus loaded with the world’s abhorrence;
that she should be compelled to honour with the sacred name of husband
a fugitive, a prison-breaker, and an outlaw? If I had suffered these
things in the defence of my children, my religion, or my country,
the case would have been widely different. If, while encountering
the contempt of men, I had carried within me the glorious feeling,
that what they regarded as my disgrace was indeed my immortal honour,
Marguerite de Damville, beyond all women, was prepared to despise their
senseless blame, and proudly to demand her share in such a dishonour.

I know there are men who will listen with fretful impatience to a
detail of such sorrows as hers, and who will cry out, “If we must be
distressed, give us more substantial and genuine sources of distress!”
They will regard the dejection of Marguerite as an idle wilfulness of
grief, better entitled to aversion than to sympathy; and will tell me
that nothing but the most deplorable blindness could have prevented her
from discerning the happiness of her condition; that she had the world
before her, a rich, a brave, and an enterprising husband, with a lovely
family of children; that they could move from country to country,
and from climate to climate, carrying with them the means of luxury,
indulgence, homage, and usefulness. To such moralisers I write not. For
those who are incapable of sympathising with the delicate sensations of
Marguerite, I am as little qualified to enter into their feelings as
they into mine. In the sequel of the story however it is not impossible
they may meet with their gratification. I am hastening to events
corporeal and palpable. I and my family did wander from country to
country, and from climate to climate. With what resulting success will
speedily be seen.

Our destination at the present moment led us through the territory
of the Grisons, and over a limb of the Rhetian Alps, to Como, Milan,
Piacenza, Parma, and Pisa, in the neighbourhood of which latter city
we resolved to take up our immediate residence. In this passage we
met with few adventures that merit to be recorded in my history. One
however seems entitled to a place, both as it tends to display the
singular worth of a dumb and unpretending brute, and as it is in some
sort connected with the fortunes I encountered in the Pisan territory.
It occurred in our journey over the Alps.

One evening, in the wildest and most desolate part of the mountain,
after having lodged my family in an inn, I wandered forth to take a
survey of the neighbouring scenery. It was moonlight; our travel of the
day had been short, and had left on me no impression of fatigue; while
the romantic appearance of every thing around, tempted me to extend my
excursion further than I had originally purposed. Stories of robberies
and murders in the vicinity had been repeated to us, and Marguerite had
employed the precaution of desiring Hector, such was the name which
the caprice of his former masters had bestowed on my faithful negro,
to follow my steps and hold me in sight. No anticipations of danger
however disturbed my contemplations. I resigned myself, as all my life
I had been accustomed to do, to the impressions of the moment, and
sought to shut out memory and the world from all my thoughts. The scene
was inexpressibly beautiful; the silence was uninterrupted and awful.
The splendour of the moon gave a sober and silvery tint to every thing
by which its light was caught; soft white clouds were scattered in the
deep azure of the sky; the shades were of a blackness and profundity
that could not be surpassed. Every thing was calculated to soothe
and subdue the mind, to inspire a grand and expansive tranquillity.
The enthusiasm it spoke occupied every channel of my heart. I stood
still. It seemed as if motion would have jarred and broken the spell
that seized me; I yielded with eager transport to the sentiment that
shrowded and enveloped me in its ample embrace.

I had remained motionless for above half an hour, when a sudden and
eager sound burst upon my ear. It seemed to be the shriek of some
human creature in distress. It was repeated several times. My first
impulse was to fly to the spot from which the sound appeared to
proceed. Meanwhile Hector came up to me, and endeavoured to detain me
by violence. His first principle was obedience to every just and lawful
command; and the errand upon which he was commissioned, was to preserve
me from the approach of danger. He represented to me the stories of
banditti we had recently heard. He told me that we should too probably
fall in with a numerous party of these desperadoes, against whom all
our efforts, either for ourselves or for those I was desirous to
succour, would be nugatory. What would become of my children? what
would become of his mistress, if my rashness were succeeded by a fatal
event? While he was thus speaking, and exerting himself to detain me,
the cries ceased. I believed they were those of a person assassinated.
I conceived that I should be the vilest of poltroons if I suffered
any consideration to prevent me from endeavouring to afford to this
unfortunate the relief in my power.

I had not advanced far, before I perceived coming towards us, in the
same direction from which the sound had reached my ear, a dog, entirely
black, and of uncommon stature and strength. He was alone. Having
caught sight of us, he increased his pace, and had no sooner reached
the spot on which we stood, than he seized the flap of my coat, and
pulled it with considerable violence. I was somewhat alarmed at his
size and action, the latter of which I apprehended to have a hostile
design; and, having shaken him off, I put myself in a posture of
defence with a cane that I carried in my hand. Undeterred however by my
gesture, he returned to the attack, only pulling with something less
exertion of strength than he had done before. More accurate attention
convinced me that he had no intention to injure me, and I withheld
the action of Hector, who had raised his hand to strike in defence
of his master. I suffered him to guide me; and, after a considerable
circuit which the nature of the road obliged us to take, he led me to
a spot where I found a man lying on the ground, and weltering in his
blood, but with no person near, to whom to impute the violence he had
sustained.

His blood flowed copiously from two or three different wounds, one of
them in particular near his left breast; and my first care was to stop
the effusion. For this purpose we stripped him of his clothes, and tore
his linen into bandages. When we found him, he was insensible; but the
anguish of binding his wounds revived him a little, though only enough
to extort from him sighs and groans. This accomplished, I dismissed
Hector to the inn to procure something in the nature of a litter,
by which he might more easily be conveyed within reach of effectual
assistance.

I was now left for six hours with no other companions than the wounded
gentleman and his dog, upon the very spot upon which he had just
before sustained so ferocious a treatment, probably from the hands of
banditti. They might every moment be expected to return. This was no
agreeable notion to a person circumstanced as I was. I was compelled
to feel that a man possessed of boundless and illimitable wealth,
and of the power of repelling old age and disease, did not in these
advantages possess every thing. Notwithstanding the disappointments
and mortifications I had sustained, I was yet attached to life: and
though the bequests of the stranger had hitherto produced to me nothing
but evil, I still looked, with almost puerile eagerness and beating
of heart, for the time when I might spread out the whole extent of
my treasures without parsimony or the dread of reverse. During the
interval which I employed in these reflections, the wounded man was for
the most part in a state of insensibility, and constantly speechless.
I expected his death every moment, and I perceived, as I thought
with certainty, that there was no hope of his recovery. While we had
dressed his wounds, the dog had watched our motions with the most
restless attention, and, now that it was over, he came and licked my
hands, and laid himself down at my feet. The least motion however, so
much as a rustling among the leaves, startled him: he rose, looked
round, and seemed to enquire into the cause of the disturbance; but he
abstained from barking and every kind of noise; whether it were that
he was conscious of the advantage of quiet to a person in his master’s
condition, or that he had the sense to know, in the situation in which
we were placed, that whatever produced alarm, might eventually expose
us to undiscovered danger.

It was broad daylight before Hector re-appeared, and several other
persons in his company. Hector was not of a temper to have receded
from any thing he undertook, and the authority of Marguerite had in
this instance seconded his remonstrances with the surly and inactive
peasants of the place. I had at this time only one other male servant;
but, when Hector returned, he brought with him a crazy kind of litter,
and a recruit of four mountaineers. The wounded man still lived, and
was conveyed alive to the place at which I had taken up my lodging.
He survived three days; and, during the whole of that period, the dog
could neither be moved by force, nor prevailed on by entreaties, to
quit the apartment of his master. Before his death my unfortunate guest
recovered the power of speech. He told me that his name was Andrea
Filosanto, and, which struck me as somewhat extraordinary, that he
was of Pisa, the very place at which I purposed to take up my abode.
He had a brother resident in that city, and had himself been about to
marry a very beautiful and accomplished young lady, an heiress, of the
house of Carracciuoli in Pisa. Previously to his marriage, he resolved
to make a visit to his mother, who had espoused to her second husband a
French nobleman of Languedoc. He had travelled accompanied only by one
servant, contrary to the persuasions both of his brother and the family
of his intended bride; but that servant, though he had been a very
short time in his employment, was active, ingenious, and obliging, and
had established himself strongly in the favour of his master. Signor
Filosanto had taken with him a sum of money, the produce of one year’s
income of the dower of his mother; and it was but too probable that
the richness of the charge he bore, had been fatal to the life of the
bearer. His servant had disappeared from his side not a quarter of an
hour before his being attacked by the banditti; and various concurring
circumstances seemed to fix on this servant the accusation of being
an accomplice with the murderers. Having heard from the unfortunate
sufferer the tale of treachery of his human attendant, I related to
him the extraordinary example of fidelity and attachment shown by his
dog. The master was struck with the story I told, and called the dog
to him upon his bed. The poor animal first leaped up upon the foot of
the bed, and then warily and with great caution crawled to his master’s
face. Filosanto embraced the dog, who by his manner showed himself
fully sensible of the purport of the action. That very evening, having
requested me to convey his remains to the tomb of his ancestors at
Pisa, the master expired. The dog in dumb and constant grief watched
by the corpse, and followed the vehicle in which it was conveyed to
Pisa. After the funeral, he made the choice, from which he could not
be diverted, of living with me, and not with the brother and relations
of his master, to whom he was almost wholly a stranger, but who would
gladly have received him. One of the advantages I derived from this
adventure, was the friendship and protection of the Filosanti and
Carracciuoli, two of the most powerful families in Pisa.

I have not yet finished the history of my dog. A few months after our
establishment in the Pisan territory, the valet of the deceased had the
audacity to appear in that city. He believed himself to be entirely
unknown there, his master having taken him into his service during his
residence as a student in the university of Bologna; and having ordered
him, previously to his projected tour into France, to stay behind and
settle his debts and other affairs at that place. He found however an
adversary in Pisa that in all his anticipations had never occurred to
his thoughts. The dog saw him at a distance in the street, ran towards
him with incredible swiftness, and fell upon him with savage violence
and ferocity. The man was not extricated from his grip, till he had
been severely and dangerously wounded. Thus assailed, all the terrors
of superstition and an accusing conscience seized on this devoted
villain; he owned who he was, and confessed that he had made one among
the assassins and plunderers of his master, visible probably to the
dog, though unseen by the unfortunate Filosanto. He declared, that he
knew not what motive had brought him to Pisa, that he seemed to himself
under the guidance of an impulse which he had not power to resist,
and that he rejoiced that Providence had thus conducted him to the
expiation of his guilt. He was brought to his trial, and suffered death
for his crime.

Charon, such was the name by which my dog was distinguished, showed
himself in all his actions worthy of the character for attachment and
sagacity which he had in these instances acquired. He was therefore
the favourite of my whole family, and particularly of Hector. But his
own partiality was with the nicest discrimination reserved for me.
The ruling passion of his preceding master had been the sports of
the field, and his leading singularity an uncommon familiarity and
friendship towards his brute attendants. By this conduct he had won
the affections, and perhaps awakened the understanding and virtues,
of the faithful Charon. I own my weakness. I could not resist the
assiduities and regard of this generous brute; and, though I had never
before conceived any extraordinary partiality for creatures of his
species, his sagacity and nobleness of nature took a strong hold of my
affection. I admired his form and agility as he bounded and gamboled
before me upon the plain. In the midst of his gayest frolics he was all
attention, and the least sign I made him would instantly divert his
exertions to a different pursuit. He was accustomed to salute me with
honest, undesigning homage every morning as I came from my chamber, and
I should have missed his presence with heaviness of heart upon this
plain and homely occasion. He was the associate of my solitary walks,
and my companion when pensive meditations induced me to withdraw from
all human society. I became accustomed at such periods to observe him
by my side, and should have felt that all was not right if he were
not there. I was interested in his health, his well-being and his
enjoyments; and, if any calamity befell him, was prepared to feel it
more severely than a wise man is sometimes willing to confess.--It
would scarcely be necessary to add to this simple history of my
faithful Charon, the circumstance of his having saved the life of a
beautiful little boy of ten years old, who had unluckily slipped into
the Arno, and whom he seized by his garments and drew to the shore,
had it not some connection with what I shall speedily have occasion to
relate.




CHAPTER XXIV.


To return to the thread of my narrative, which in stating these
particulars I have in some points anticipated.--I sat down, as I have
already said, in the environs of the city of Pisa. Marguerite, as
well as myself, had a powerful attachment to the retirement of rural
life, and I judged it equally eligible for the health and intellectual
improvement of my daughters. I accordingly purchased a small domain,
delightfully situated, but of simple appearance, on the banks of
the Arno. Here I proposed to remain during the indisposition of my
wife, which I flattered myself retirement, tranquillity, attention
and kindness, would in no long time be able to cure. To this object
I resolved to devote my exertions. Well did she merit this return
from me, who had restored me in the guilty ruin of my fortunes, and
raised me from the abyss of insanity. Odious and detestable in the
utmost degree should I have appeared in my own eyes, if I could have
neglected any means I was able to devise, to heal a mischief of which
my own precipitation, selfishness, and folly were the only causes.
Every little, continual, nameless care I exerted, was as a drop of
healing balm to the burning fever and remorse of my conscience.
Nothing indeed could eradicate my distemper; I felt the ever-living
worm of perpetrated guilt gnawing at my heart. But my solicitudes for
Marguerite, at least during the moments they were in action, mitigated
my anguish; and this transitory relief, however insignificant it may
appear in the eyes of others, I cherished beyond the wealth of kingdoms.

Marguerite and myself appeared at this time to have changed characters.
She was languid, indisposed in body and mind, her thoughts gloomy, her
hopes blasted, her wishes bankrupt. Still however she maintained her
superiority to what I had been in a similar condition. She endeavoured
to make the best of what yet remained to her, though she declined
the vain attempt of forgetting what she had lost. She hung over her
daughters with inexpressible endearment. She consoled them; she
reasoned with them; she endeavoured to steel their minds for whatever
ill might be yet in store. She cultivated their understandings; she
breathed into them mingled sentiments of resignation and energy. There
was in her conversation with them a striking tone of celestial and
divine. Her eloquence was copious; her manner rich, unaffected, and
flowing; her speech simple, free from exaggeration and turbulence,
but mild, affectionate, and winning. It sank deep into the hearts
of her hearers, and seemed to give a new turn to their tempers
and disposition. It rendered the character of Julia at once more
distinctive, and yet more chastised; it inspired an unwonted mildness
and sensibility to that of Louisa; and rendered the cadette of the
family unusually grave, thoughtful, and sedate.

But upon me were devolved the more active occupations of our
establishment. Marguerite had formerly been, I was now, the steward.
Every kind of superintendence, from which the distinction of sex did
not unavoidably exclude me, was resigned to me by the lovely victim of
my indiscretions. Marguerite had been my nurse, I was now ambitious
to be hers. I made myself the schoolmaster of my children; Marguerite
confined her communications to general topics and the culture of the
heart. I initiated them in music, drawing, geography, several different
languages of Europe, and in every accomplishment that I believed would
be really ornamental or improving to them. I might, it is true, have
hired different masters to instruct them in each of these branches,
and it is not impossible that they might then have been better taught,
though I was myself no incompetent preceptor. But I had an honest
artifice for my guide in the plan I adopted: I was desirous of removing
out of the sight of my wife every thing that might remind her of the
fatal legacy, the effects of which she was induced so bitterly to
deplore. In some particulars I may affirm of myself that I was now
a better and a kinder husband, than I had been in the days of our
gayest prosperity, or the scene of our infant loves. I studied with
assiduity the temper of Marguerite; I watched her looks; I endeavoured
to anticipate her every wish. I meditated with care the plan of life,
which her simple and feeling heart, if solely consulted, would have
led her originally to have chosen; and I copied out in the whole
arrangement of our household the idea painted in my mind. Far from us
were now the ostentation and pomp of the family-château on the banks
of the Garonne. We lived now, not to awaken admiration and envy in the
bosom of guests and spectators: we lived for ourselves. Every thing was
elegant; every thing was tasteful; but not an article found its place
in our residence, that did not rest its claim to be there upon a plea
of usefulness. Though, by the nature of my situation, I was superior to
all restraint from a consideration of expense, yet our competent board
and orderly habitation approached nearer in their appearance to the
honest plainness of a rustic, than to the sumptuousness of hereditary
nobility. A table set out with striking propriety and neatness was
preferred to the richness of plate and the splendour of porcelain and
lustres. I was anxious that Marguerite should forget the change of our
situation and the extent of my resources. The objects of my present
pursuit were obscurity and content. That Marguerite might forget my
acquisition, I was studious to appear to have forgotten it myself. If a
stranger had entered our habitation, and surveyed our economy, he would
have judged that our revenues amounted to a decent competence, and that
we disbursed them with a judicious discretion. Nothing was to be seen
that would have betrayed the possessor of the powder of projection.

We had no guests. We cultivated no acquaintance. We were formed to
suffice to each other within our little circle; and, but for the
importunate recurrence of disquieting reflections, we should have
done so. To look at the exterior of our household, it might have been
thought that we had arrived at that sweet forgetfulness of anxious
care, that delicious leisure and unbroken retreat, which have in all
ages been the theme of panegyric to poets and philosophers. But it
was not so. Our reciprocal relations were changed; and the hope of
the house of St. Leon was no longer in the midst of us, to cheer, to
enlighten, and to warm our bosoms.

A life of leisure is often an active and a busy life. The grand, I
might almost say the single, object of present attention to me, was
the restoration of the health and tranquillity of Marguerite. For that
I watched with unwearied assiduity. Subordinate to this occupation
were the different arts and accomplishments in which I instructed my
daughters. Yet neither the former nor the latter of these engagements
filled up all the time of a mind so restless and rapid as mine was.
Intervals occurred, in which my attentions to Marguerite would have
been, not soothing, but troublesome, and in which I could no longer
impart a lesson to my daughters, without relaxing and weakening the
spring of progression in their minds. These intervals I sometimes
dedicated to chemistry and the operations of natural magic. The more
effectually to hide these pursuits from the eye of Marguerite, I
occupied, unknown to her, a sort of grotto, buried almost from human
observation in a hollow on the banks of the river, and which was
connected, by a winding path and a concealed subterranean passage,
with the garden of my own habitation. The secrets of the stranger had
given me a particular relish for this kind of pursuit. There are habits
of the mind and modes of occupying the attention, in which, when once
we have engaged, there seems a sort of physical impossibility of ever
withdrawing ourselves. This was my case in the present instance. My
habit was of no long standing. But no reading of my story, no mere
power of language and words, can enable a bystander to imagine how
deep it was sunk into my heart, how inextricably it was twisted with
all the fibres of my bosom. That he may in some degree enter into my
situation, I entreat the reader to consider what are the most imperious
passions of the human mind. They have rudely been described to be
wealth, power, and pleasurable sensation. How alluring to every one
of us are the visionary conceptions of the mind respecting these most
potent excitements! But mine were no visions. I had grasped them in
my hand, and known their reality. I had felt that the wealth of the
whole world was at my disposal, and that I held my life by a tenure
independent and imperial. These are not of the class of conceptions
that fade and perish from the mind. We cannot wake from them as from
a dream, and forget that ever such things were. They had changed the
whole constitution of my nature. It would have required a miracle,
greater than all the consecrated legends of our church record, to have
restored me to what I formerly was. If then I could have resolved never
henceforth to use the gifts I had received, I yet firmly believe that
I never could have refrained from the composition and decomposition of
simples, and from experiments on the nature of substances, chemical
and metallic. I was however far from having formed any such resolution
as that I have named. My present forbearance to bring forth the secret
treasure of my powers was purely an accommodation to the unhappy
condition of my wife; and I felt it as a meritorious exertion thus to
postpone the use of the faculties I possessed. In the mean time the
amusement I sought, that I regarded as properly and entirely my own,
consisted in these experiments. While I was busied with my crucible, I
was able more vividly to present to myself my seeming superiority to
the rest of my species. I used the employments of my grotto, as a sort
of starting-post from which to set forth in a series of intoxicating
reveries; not to mention that to improve in the facility of my secret
operations might become a valuable subsidiary to the pursuits of my
future life.

I took occasionally as my companion at these periods the negro of the
prison of Constance. I found him sufficiently adapted for my purpose;
his innocence and implicit obedience to whomever he served, rendering
me secure that he would anticipate nothing, that he would conjecture
nothing, that he would rest in what he saw, that I might almost
exhibit my whole process under his eye, without once awakening the
busy fiend of curiosity in a mind to which science had never unveiled
her charms. He was formed to be a pure, passive machine in the hands
of his employer, only with this singular difference from the lifeless
machine of the engineer or mechanical inventor, that he was susceptible
of attachment and affection, as well as of a certain species of
contentment and a certain species of goodness and virtue.

A feature of my individual character which has already frequently
presented itself to the attention of the reader is the love of
admiration and spontaneous deference. I am at this moment ashamed of
my vices and my follies; but it must be recollected, in the first
place, that they are human, and in the second that I am writing, not
their vindication, but their history. In the midst of my experiments
and chemical lucubrations, I could not help sometimes ostentatiously
exhibiting to Hector the wonders of my art, and those extraordinary
effects which have in all ages drawn upon the more eminent operators of
natural magic the reproach of being necromancers and conjurers. This I
did, partly perhaps that my attendant might learn to look up to me with
a kind of nameless respect and awe, but partly also that I might divert
myself with the simplicity of his nature, and the gaping and motionless
astonishment with which he viewed my performances. If I had not done
this, or digressed into idle and ostentatious experiments, he would
otherwise have seen enough, in the operations in which his assistance,
if not absolutely necessary, was extremely convenient, to have induced
a person, so void of the meanest European information, to regard me as
assisted by and in league with invisible powers.

The prejudice against me, with which this poor fellow had been
impressed at the commencement of our intercourse did not long hold out,
in his ingenuous mind, against the more favourable sentiments which my
present situation and mode of living were calculated to inspire. The
specimens he had hitherto seen of European society were of the most
unfavourable kind. His first master was a wretch of brutal disposition,
ferocious and insolent; disdaining to reason himself, and impatient of
remonstrance in others. This man had exercised the temper of his humble
and honest attendant with every variety of savage caprice; and, having
tired the restlessness of his own gloomy tyranny, without being able to
exhaust the modest and unexampled patience of his servant, had finished
by throwing him into gaol, upon a wanton and groundless charge of
dishonesty. This, which was intended as a further exercise of tyranny,
deserved to be hailed by the poor sufferer as a period of jubilee and
deliverance. His innocence, as I have already related, was speedily
recognised by his new task-master, who accordingly exerted himself to
obtain justice for the friendless victim; and from a reputed thief
proposed to elevate him to the rank of a turnkey. Hector had neither
kindred nor patron to assist him; the outcast of a gaol, he must again
have entered the world with a blasted character. Thus circumstanced,
and influenced beside by gratitude to the unlooked-for liberality of
his deliverer, he willingly accepted the situation proposed to him.
With his new master, who, not less unprincipled, was less tyrannical
than his predecessor, the humbleness of his hopes taught him to be
contented. Yet in the bosom of the gaoler all his fidelity and regard
could not enable him to detect one positive virtue; and, within the
walls of the prison, there had existed nothing that could by any
possibility cherish and refresh the human heart.

The scene presented to Hector’s observation in our little retreat, on
the banks of the Arno, was of a very different nature. To his frank
and affectionate spirit, it appeared a perfect paradise. He had yet
scarcely been acquainted with any but the refuse of mankind, from the
infection of whose vices his unapprehensive and invincible simplicity
had been his only safeguard; and he was now suddenly introduced to
the presence and intercourse of the most perfect of her sex. He loved
her as a benefactor, and he worshipped her as a god. There is no
receipt for begetting affection in others, so infallible as a warm
and susceptible heart. Hector accordingly soon became in a remarkable
degree the favourite of my daughters. His temper was naturally cheerful
and gay; and, warmed by their encouragement, it became a thousand
times more so. When he had completed the occupations of the day, the
lightness of his spirit would prompt him to sing and dance for ever. He
exhibited the whole circle of his sportive games for their amusement.
The infantine innocence of his understanding remarkably adapted him to
be the butt of their little waggeries and mischiefs. Whatever tricks
were played upon him, were however tempered by the forbearance and
regard his worth demanded; while the obstreperous cheerfulness with
which he would second their mirth, when most ignorant of its occasion,
gave uncommon zest to the amusement, and furnished eternal provocation
to the prolonging and varying its features.

Let not the fastidious reader complain of the inconsistency of this
part of my picture, or censure the levity of my daughters. I am not
writing a tragedy, but a history. Sad grief and melancholy cannot, and
ought not, for ever to reign in the human face or the human heart.
No daughters ever loved a mother more entirely, more fervently, than
Marguerite was loved by her children. They were unwearied in their
attention to her: often was their pillow watered with tears, occasioned
by the sad presentiment of the loss they were destined to sustain.
But the human mind, particularly in the season of youth, has an
unconquerable principle of elasticity in its frame. The bow cannot be
kept for ever on the stretch; and, when the whole soul appears to be
bent down by calamity to the grave, it will often surprisingly recover
its vigour and renew its strength. The ingenuous nature of these poor
girls led them indeed occasionally to reproach themselves with these
moments of cheerfulness as with a crime. But it was no crime. None
but the uncharitably rigorous and morose will charge it upon them as
a crime. It interfered with no duty; it diminished no affection; it
had no tendency to harden their hearts. It was a tax they paid to the
imperfectness of our nature; it was a tribute of gratitude to that God
who, while he deals out to us the most terrible calamities, fails not
to mix with the copious draught some solitary drops of beneficence.
Julia alone, whose temper was constitutionally serious and soft,
entered little into these sports, of which her youngest sister was
the eternal leader and untired partaker. Yet even upon the grave
countenance of Julia they would sometimes provoke an unwilling smile,
which upon her countenance sat with uncommon lustre.

The hilarity and loveliness which Hector found in the midst of my
family instigated and increased the attachment he began to feel for
myself. He could not believe that the father of such daughters, and
the chosen husband of such a consort, could be destitute of a title to
be loved. He reasoned in his own way upon the attempt I had made to
corrupt his fidelity, an attack which he never thoroughly digested. I
have reason to believe that his attendance upon my chemical processes,
and the wonders I occasionally showed to excite his astonishment, did
not tend to elevate me in his good opinion. But he could not avoid
witnessing in me many of the virtues of a good husband and a good
father, and these, so new to his observation, strongly impressed him in
my favour. The regularity of my habits and the mildness of my carriage
were also calculated to win his affection and esteem. Never had the
poor fellow’s affections been so forcibly called out as they were in
his new situation; and he would cheerfully have stretched out his neck
to the assassin’s knife, to have warded off impending evil from the
meanest of us.

Prosperity and ease have often been found the parents of wishes and
inclinations unfelt before. Adversity is the season of sober thought,
calls home the erratic mind, and teaches us to be cheaply satisfied.
But the man who has many gratifications is apt to wander in imagination
from daily and familiar joys, and confidently to reach after things
yet untried. Such was the situation of Hector: Hector was in love. Our
sweet and simple mansion was distant scarcely more than two hundred
yards from a characteristic Italian village. The maid of a little
_albergo_ in this place had caught his inexperienced heart. He had
been invited by some peasants to a moonlight festivity on the lawn
of the _albergo_; and, though I should have been better pleased that
my servants should decline this sort of amusement, I could not have
the heart to deny him. It was, so far as I knew, the first and the
last time that Hector had ever resorted to it. But I was deceived.
Hector had proved the gayest and most amusing of the whole circle. His
cheerfulness was inexhaustible, and his mirth in the utmost degree
harmless and good humoured. He had played a thousand antics, and danced
with an agility that knew no end. In a word, the accomplishments of
Hector, in spite of the jetty hue that stained his face, had won the
heart, or roused the coquetry, of the plump and rosy bar-maid. The
overtures she made and the lures she threw out were too glaring to
escape the notice even of the modest Hector. He felt himself flattered,
such is human nature, at suddenly becoming an object of admiration and
preference to a woman, whom his imagination, stimulated by her visible
partiality, attired in a hundred charms. He owned himself hers, in all
fair and honest fealty, to the world’s end.

Love taught Hector a lesson which he had never learned before. In
nature he was frank, and, as far as fidelity to his master permitted
it, wore his heart as naked as his face. Love taught him dissimulation.
A vulgar footman or clown is as forward as the most empty beau, in
boasting of the triumphs he has gained over the female heart, and in
sacrificing the reputation of those who have loved him at the shrine
of his vanity. Not such was Hector. He shut Up his new sensations
and reveries as a sacred deposit in his bosom. Nature worked within
him, and he would have been ashamed to speak, and distressed to hear,
of emotions, now felt, till now never experienced. His artless and
ingenuous temper in this one particular assumed the guise of cunning.
Never did he tell his love in the ear of any indifferent auditor;
assiduously did he avoid pronouncing even the name of her to whom he
was attached. In any other case he would have announced to me his
inclinations, and previously demanded my leave of absence for his
excursions. But love seemed to him imperiously to command privacy, and
he employed every imaginable precaution to prevent me and all human
beings from knowing whither he went, or that he was absent at all.

In one of his visits to his fair _donzella_, he happened incautiously
to drop some very remote hint of the scenes in which he had just
been engaged with me in my secret grotto. The curiosity of the girl
was strongly roused; she questioned him further. He started, and was
terrified to recollect what he had said. I had strictly enjoined him
secrecy towards every member of my family: my precaution had extended
no further; for, as I have said, I scarcely knew that he had the most
casual intercourse with any person beyond my own roof. But Hector
naturally dreaded that what I was so earnest to conceal from every one
in my house he would be highly to blame to communicate to a stranger.
He therefore peremptorily refused, and with many signs of distress, to
say another word on the subject.

The _donzella_, piqued at his resistance, had recourse to female arts.
She was cruel; she uttered words of sharp displeasure and disdain;
she knew that a person who refused her such a trifle could not have
an atom of regard for her; she commanded him never to see her more.
Unsuccessful in these expedients, she had recourse to expedients of
a different sort. She wept; she called him base, false-hearted and
unkind; she saw he was determined to be the death of her; she was
seized with strong fits of sobbing and hysterical affection. In the
midst of all this he was as unmoved as a rock of marble. He interpreted
every thing that passed in its most literal form; he felt more severely
her unkindness, and sympathised more truly in her distress, than
perhaps any human creature would have done. But no further could she
gain upon him. The confidence of his master was in question, and he
would sooner have died upon the rack, than run the slightest risk of
betraying it.

From these arts she descended to arts more congenial to the habits
of her life. She summoned all her skill to perplex him with cunning
and insidious questions. From her questions he ought to have fled;
but of this Hector was incapable. He was distressed by her severity,
he grieved for the unintentional pain he had caused her. All these
circumstances melted his heart; and he could not resolve upon any thing
that was not considerate and respectful towards her. As the framing
of artful questions was the strong-hold of the _donzella_, and she
might have challenged in this article the most hoary practitioner of
the quibbling bar, so it was exactly the weakest side upon which poor
Hector could be attacked. His simplicity yielded him up a defenceless
prey to the assailant; least of all human undertakings was he capable
of detecting the various faces of a doubtful question, and of guarding
himself against the traps of an insidious foe. It was not till the
fourth interview from Hector’s original hint, that the _donzella_
had recourse to this species of attack; and she did not withdraw her
forces, till she had extorted from him all he knew.

When Hector found that all his guards were baffled and put to flight,
he had then recourse to the only expedient that remained, conjuring
her by every thing sacred and every thing tremendous, not to betray a
trust she had so ungenerously obtained from him. She readily promised
every thing he desired. Soothed by her compliance, he determined not to
mention to me the lapse of which he had been guilty. It would in his
opinion have been little less than treason, to suspect his Dulcinea
of indiscretion or frailty. In the breast of this miracle of nature
was not his loyalty as secure as it could be even in his own? Why then
should he betray the secret of his love, which had never yet been
confided even to the senseless air? Why should he subject himself to
the inconceivable anguish and confusion, of owning, where my interests,
or where my wishes were concerned, that he had been found tripping and
imperfect? Why should he inflict a pain, or cause in me a fear, which
he knew, and he only could know, was groundless? Thus it happened that
I had one more confident of what I purposed should be secret, than I
was myself in the smallest degree advertised of.

The consequences of this indiscretion of my servant were not slow
in rendering themselves visible. The _donzella_ was by no means so
scrupulous or delicate in her sentiments, as my humble, but faithful,
attendant. As she had given her company to Hector, she had had an
opportunity of observing in him such integrity and goodness of heart,
as could not fail to extort the esteem of any human being. She really
honoured him; she was unwilling to give him any cause of uneasiness.
But she had another lover; perhaps she had more. The laws of chastity
she regarded as prejudices, and believed they were never formed for
persons in her situation in society. She was of opinion that the more
lovers she had, provided she satisfied them all, the more completely
did she improve the talents with which Heaven had endowed her. Few
women have any secrets for the man they admit to their embraces. In an
hour of amorous dalliance she communicated to Agostino, the ostler, all
that she knew of the conjurations and spells of Monsieur Boismorand,
such was the name I had assumed upon my entrance into Italy. Her
communication was probably attended with cautions, imitated from those
with which Hector had so industriously loaded the _donzella_ in the
preceding example. Perhaps the _illustrissimo Agostino_ had another
mistress, with whom he thought it would be unjust to practise greater
reserves than the _donzella_ had done with him. Be that as it will, the
rumours which were whispered to my prejudice speedily got air; and,
it may be, were repeated with the greater avidity, on account of the
mystery that attended them, and the injunctions of secrecy with which
they were accompanied.




CHAPTER XXV.


Italy may be considered as the very focus and parent of superstitious
credulity. The materials which Hector had furnished, after all
the interrogations of the donzella, were slight compared with the
superstructure which was presently erected on them. My grotto was
said to be the appropriated haunt where a thousand devils held their
infernal sabbath. The terrified imagination of the rustics, listening
with a temper horribly distracted between curiosity and alarm, created
to itself fictitious howlings and shrieks, and saw pale and sulphureous
flames dancing upon the surface of the stream. Poor Hector was early
the victim of their cruel and untamed ignorance; they believed that
the peculiarity of his complexion rendered him a singularly agreeable
intercessor between me and my infernal familiars. The colour of Charon
was similar to that of my confidential attendant; and he, like Hector,
fell under the calumnious misconstructions of the affrighted villagers.
Conspicuously noble, affectionate and useful as he was, the jaundiced
eye of superstition metamorphosed him into a devil. The storms of
thunder and lightning to which the climate in which I resided is
particularly subject acquired new terror from the ill fame which now
pursued the name of Monsieur Boismorand. At those times the shapeless
form of monsters vomiting smoke and flames were visible to the
neighbourhood, sometimes scudding along the blue tops of the distant
hills, and at others, with audaciousness incredible, brushing even
at the elbow of the almost lifeless clowns and dairy-maids, and then
suddenly dissolving into air, their place no longer marked but by the
noisome and deadly stench they left behind. All the misfortunes of the
district were imputed to me, the mortality of cattle, the convulsions
and death of children, and the pale and lingering decay of persons
recently advanced to an age of puberty. Innocent and blameless was my
conduct to all around us; often was I forward and eager for the relief
of the poor and afflicted; never was I the author of the slightest
inconvenience or prejudice to any. Yet nothing merely human could be
hated in the degree in which I was hated; few were daring and intrepid
enough to repeat the very name I bore; and, when it was inadvertently
pronounced, it produced through the whole extent of the astonished
circle an involuntary and supernatural shudder.

Agostino, the first lover who had made an impression on the heart of
Hector’s donzella, was, as I afterwards found, a fellow of a gloomy
and ferocious disposition, a true Italian _spadaccino_, determined
that none should perpetrate an affront against him with impunity, but
should expiate, in some refined and cruel vengeance, the levity by
which they had been so unfortunate as to give birth to his hatred.
He by no means relished or approved the liberal and good-humoured
sentiments of the donzella; often had they inflicted on him the
darkest torments of jealousy; nor had he failed, at least in one
preceding instance, to make his rival the victim of his resentment.
The donzella however went on in her career; she was light of heart,
gay in temper, and careless of consequences. She had always hitherto
succeeded, by playful blandishments, or more serious demonstrations of
contrition, in mollifying the temper of her brute; and every pardon she
received operated with her as a new permission to offend. She did not
sufficiently consider that she was thus continually raising to a higher
pitch the frenzy of his malice. Hector in the mean time was utterly
unconscious and ignorant of the perilous situation in which he stood;
while, to the apprehension of Agostino, the giving him a negro for a
rival, whom his pride regarded as belonging to an inferior species of
beings, and his devout ignorance likened to the leader of the infernal
squadrons, was the last and most intolerable insult.

His malice was ingenious and subtle. He disdained the vulgar revenge
of stabbing his antagonist in the dark, and supposing that his
enmity could be gorged by a blow. When the venom of his nature was
thoroughly put in motion, nothing could restore it to quietness and
tranquillity but some mighty stroke, to excite the wonder of every
bystander, and that should leave behind it a track of desolation,
never to be filled up again and erased. He heard therefore with unsated
appetite and eager joy the tale of necromancy and infernal machination
repeated to him from Hector by the donzella. The impression which the
narrative produced upon him was a mixed sentiment of transport at the
apprehension of such an instrument of vengeance and of palpitating
hatred; superstition teaching him to believe and to view with
abhorrence that which he desired to render tenfold more an object of
faith and aversion to his neighbours. He struck an auspicious and
august alliance between his revenge and his religion; his religion
exciting him to exterminate that, the destruction of which would
produce inexpressible gratification to his revenge. The darkness of
his spirit led him to proceed with double caution and vigilance in his
correspondence with the donzella. He discovered nothing to her of the
dark project which was engendering in his mind; and only betrayed so
much of his superstitious feelings and fears as, by giving new emotion,
might stimulate her to gratify his curiosity and her own by a detection
of further particulars. He was assiduous in the underhand and sinister
propagation of the tale, to which he did not fail to give his own
colouring and affix his own feelings. He was desirous that the train
should be laid in silence, and that the explosion he designed should
be free from all pre-signification of the event. Thus an individual,
of whose animosity I had no apprehension, and the meanness of whose
appearance would probably have made me neglect all precaution against
him, gave method and direction to an evil, of which however, upon a
review, I am not inclined to doubt I should have been the victim, if
the enmity and industry of this individual had been wholly withdrawn.

The mischief was long in preparation, before I received in any way the
slightest intimation of the predicament in which I stood. The first
circumstance at all calculated to excite alarm in my mind, was the
singular manner in which I found myself regarded, if I entered any of
the neighbouring villages, or met the rustics and their dames, as I
strayed along the roads or the fields. They fled my approach, deserted
the streets, and carefully shut themselves up in their houses, till I
had passed. Where it was impossible to avoid me, they bowed themselves
to the earth in the most submissive guise before me, while the most
lively terror was painted in their countenances, dreading lest they
should excite the resentment of a tremendous and inexorable foe. These
tokens however were far from inspiring me with a conception of the
truth. They perplexed, they astonished, they distressed me. Sore as I
was with my recent afflictions, my mind was but too fully prepared for
anticipations of evil. I had suffered from suspicions, I had suffered
from calumnious imputations, I had suffered from the malignant effects
of popular rumour. Had I yielded my confidence to any person but such a
one as Hector, it is probable my suspicions would have turned on that
side. But my reliance on him was not less than that which Alexander
the Great yielded to Philip the physician: I knew his rectitude, his
simplicity, his fidelity, and the singleness of his heart; and I could
not harbour the shadow of a doubt respecting him. My reliance was
of that entire and perfect sort, which did not express itself by a
recollection of the physical possibility and an acquittal founded in
deliberation, but by a total vacancy of doubt, or of retrospect that
way directed, just such as the state of my mind would have appeared, if
the thing had been naturally impossible.

I was not however ignorant and raw enough to be deceived by the
exterior of homage I have described; I sufficiently knew that what I
beheld was the offspring of hatred. To feel one’s self hated is in all
instances a painful and humiliating state of the human mind. To me
it was especially so. I was not formed to retaliate this species of
injury; I could not hate in my turn. I was formed to love. I could not
look upon my species with dark and gloomy contemplations; I was prompt
to admire their virtues, and perhaps even too prompt to extenuate
their errors. It may, I believe, be laid down as a rule, that they who
cannot hate can least endure to be made objects of hatred. Fettered
however as I now was, by the tenderest consideration for the health and
tranquillity of Marguerite, I thought it best to temporise and submit
in silence. My principal anxiety was to hide these symptoms from the
notice of my family. This I could not completely effect; some of them
were too glaring and obtrusive, entirely to escape the observation
of my daughters in their walks. But the filial forbearance they felt
towards their mother led them implicitly and without any concerted plan
to concur with me in my exertions for her quiet.

The animosity of Agostino was restless and inextinguishable. His
plans did not terminate in exciting against me a secret and covered
abhorrence; they aimed at nothing less than my utter destruction. The
next exertion of the conspiracy which was engendering against me was of
a tragical nature.

It happened one night, after all my family was retired to rest, and
I was myself sunk into a slumber, that I was suddenly alarmed at the
report of a musket, which seemed to be fired almost under the window
of my chamber. This was a very singular circumstance, and calculated
to convey an impression of danger. I leaped from my bed, and ran to
the window. The night was extremely dark, and every thing seemed
perfectly quiet. Presently I discerned a glimmering light, like that
of a lantern, which however appeared to be gradually retiring to a
greater distance. I was not thus satisfied, but determined to hasten
down stairs, and investigate the cause of the disturbance. Marguerite,
who had heard the firing of the musket as well as myself, now called me
to her, and entreated me not to expose myself to unnecessary danger.
In compliance with her remonstrances I promised, though unwillingly,
not to go out into the court or upon the lawn, but to content myself
with examining the state of every part of the house. When I came to
the staircase and the hall, I found that the alarm had communicated to
almost every person in the family, who presently assembled round me.
We patroled the house, but found every thing in the situation in which
it had been left, and nowhere any appearance of violence. I opened
several of the windows, but all was darkness and silence. Having thus
far satisfied myself, I listened with a degree of amusement to the
conjectures and sage remarks of several of the servants, a rank of
society who may usually be found to derive a degree of enjoyment from
incidents of this sort, which, for the moment, strikingly tend to
level all artificial distinctions, and confer on every one the liberty
of uttering his reflections without apprehension or constraint. I did
not however feel myself entirely easy; the circumstance which had just
occurred, combined with the forebodings which had lately impressed me,
had filled me with undefinable terror and alarm. Hector would willingly
have gone over the grounds contiguous to the house, to see if he could
discover any thing that related to or could explain the incident; but I
had promised Marguerite that I would search no further, and the temper
of my mind would not suffer me to expose another to a danger, which I
abstained from encountering in my own person. It was more than an hour
before the conclave in which we were assembled broke up, and every
one retired, fatigued with attention, and prepared to fall into the
soundest sleep. My dreams were uneasy and disturbed; my mind was in a
tumult of imaginary calamities; and I passed the greater part of the
night in a state of singular anxiety.

In the morning I was scarcely sunk into a refreshing slumber, before
I was suddenly roused from sleep by a repetition of shrieks of
astonishment and distress. I put on my clothes as quickly as I could,
and hastened towards the spot from which the sounds appeared to
proceed. The first object I beheld was the little boy of ten years’
old, whom Charon had a short time before dragged out of the river,
stretched along upon the lifeless body of this faithful and generous
animal. The musket, the report of which had alarmed us the night
before, had no doubt been aimed against Charon, and the greater part
of its contents appeared to be lodged in his body. As no further sound
had succeeded the firing, he had probably been killed on the spot.
He was at a small distance from the house, near a private footpath,
where he had been found in the morning by the lad whose life he had
recently preserved. The poor boy had not at first understood what
had happened to his benefactor, but only thought him asleep, and,
prompted by affection for the generous creature, had quietly sat down
by him till he should awake. He had not sat long however, before he
discerned about him the marks of blood. He put his hand to the wound;
the animal stirred not. He passed to his head; he saw his eyes fiery
and starting, and his lips distorted. He endeavoured to awake him, as
one would awake a human being to whom some mischief had happened of
which he was not aware. All his efforts were fruitless. He found his
body motionless, and his joints stiff in death. The apprehension of
what had occurred then suddenly flashed on his mind. He burst out into
shrieks of astonishment and anguish. Hector was the first person who
caught the sound, and hastened to the spot; I immediately followed. The
poor negro, who, in the innocence of his heart was uninitiated in the
proud distinctions by which civilised man is taught to place so vast a
barrier between the human nature and the brute, was struck speechless
with sorrow and amazement. He recognised the dead being before him for
his fellow-creature. He recollected in him his friend, his companion,
his intimate acquaintance, between whom and himself there had for some
time passed an uninterrupted reciprocation of acts of kindness and
assistance.

A morose and fastidious reader perhaps will ask me why I lay so great
a stress upon so petty and insignificant an incident as the death of
a dog. It might have been little to other persons; it was not little
to us. Let the reader recollect his ingenuity in procuring aid for
his dying master, his gratitude to the person by whom that aid was
afforded, and his unconquerable antipathy to his master’s murderer.
These are not common traits. There are many men whose premature fate
has been the most unrelentingly avenged, that in moral and useful
qualities could not have stood the comparison with my generous Charon.
It surely was no common cause for regret, that a creature who had
distinguished himself by a conduct so peculiarly admirable, should
have encountered so premature and unmerited a fate. His conduct the
reader may in some degree comprehend and appreciate; but I should in
vain attempt to delineate those admirable qualities in this faithful
domestic, which do not fall within the province of narrative, and which
to have justly appreciated you must have been personally and familiarly
acquainted with him. Beside, ours was a family of love. As we were
affectionately attached to each other, so we never admitted a servant
under our roof, who did not prove himself by his conduct utterly
unworthy, to whom we did not extend a share of that friendship and
affection, which seemed to be the right of every one that dwelt in our
family. Feeling does not stay to calculate with weights and a balance
the importance and magnitude of every object that excites it; it flows
impetuously from the heart, without consulting the cooler responses of
the understanding.

There was another circumstance which rendered the catastrophe of this
generous animal of great moment to us. It was a clear proof that
there was somewhere a strong animosity at work against his master. It
was impossible he could himself have provoked his fate. Never was a
creature more gentle and inoffensive. Though his bulk was great, and
his strength uncommon, the energies he possessed were always employed
in acts of justice and beneficence, never in acts of aggression. But if
a hatred were at work so busy and fierce as to prompt an action like
this, how were we to estimate it? What was its source, and whither did
it tend? These were very interesting and serious considerations. We
however dwelt for some time longer in the centre of general antipathy
and abhorrence, without being able in the smallest degree to explain
to ourselves what we saw. As we knew not in what we had offended, we
were unable to atone for our fault, or even to guard ourselves against
the repetition of it; nor were we by any means prepared to comprehend
the extent of our danger. Happily Marguerite, whose health was now
in a rapid decline, was least exposed to the observation of this new
mischief; though she felt enough of it to confirm her in the sentiment,
that she had nothing fortunate and happy to look forward to in the
small remainder of her existence. There was indeed one idea perpetually
present to her, which rendered the impression of ordinary occurrences
extremely feeble upon her mind:--Charles, Charles, wandering alone
in the world, unknowing and unknown, without a friend, a relative, a
counsellor, or a protector, without money and without a name! This
melancholy image followed her wherever she went, haunted her nightly
in her dreams, attended her in all her occupations, filled all her
intervals of leisure; and, though she laid it down as a law to herself
never to repeat his beloved name in my presence, she could think of
nothing else.




CHAPTER XXVI.


It was no long time after the death of Charon, that Hector came home
one evening in a state of the most violent anxiety and trepidation. He
burst upon me in my study, where I was sitting alone, buried in one of
those deep reveries which, especially since the legacy of the stranger,
had been among the most frequent habits of my mind. His perturbation
was such as to render it impossible for him to impose on himself the
smallest degree of caution and restraint. The noise he made in entering
the apartment startled me. I looked up, and perceived his features
swelled, his face bruised, and his garments disfigured with blood.

“For heaven’s sake, Hector,” exclaimed I, “what is the matter?”

He answered not. He advanced towards the upper end of the room, he took
down a pistol, one of those which I always kept loaded in my apartment,
he came towards me, he fell upon his knees, he tendered the pistol to
my acceptance.

“Hector!” cried I, “what am I to understand? what is the meaning of
this?”

“Kill me, dear master! For Christ’s sake I entreat you to kill me!”

I took the pistol from his hand; it pointed towards the floor.

“And will you not kill me?” in a mournful accent exclaimed he.

“What have you done, that deserves that I should kill you?”

“Kill me! only kill me! pray kill me!” He spread out his hands towards
me with a gesture of intreaty.

“Hector, what means this agitation? what has happened? You terrify me
beyond expression.”

“Must I speak?” replied he. “Must I be the accuser of my guilty self?”
He burst into an agony of tears.

“Would I were dead! Would I had been torn into a thousand pieces,
before this had happened! Indeed, sir, I am innocent! I thought no
harm! Indeed it is not my fault!”

“What have you done? Whence come these bruises and this wound?”

“It is all my fault! It is all my doing,--nobody else! Why will you not
kill me?”

“Hector, I cannot bear this uncertainty. Recollect yourself! Be
pacified! and tell your story!”

“Will you forgive me?”

“Forgive you what? What have you done to deserve my anger?”

“No, no, I do not wish to be forgiven! I only wish you to abhor, to
detest, to curse and to kill me!”

“This is beyond all patience.”

“I never loved any body but you, and my mistress, and my dear young
ladies. I never did any body else the least atom of mischief; and now
my folly will be the ruin of you all!

“Pardon me, sir! I will torment you no longer. I will get the better of
myself, and tell you all that has happened.”

He then informed me, though with many breaks and passionate
interruptions, of what he had just discovered, my evil repute as a
necromancer, the many strange and terrible stories that were circulated
of me, the antipathy universally entertained against me, the active
ferociousness with which this antipathy was accompanied, and the
consequences that he feared would result. He ascribed the whole to
his own imprudence, and to the particulars which the superior cunning
of the donzella, in spite of his invincible refusal to acquaint her
with a single circumstance, had wrung from him. Hector had collected
several of these particulars accidentally from a neighbouring rustic,
and had been vehement in my defence. While they were eager in debate,
others had joined them, but Hector had found them all opponents, not
one a supporter. Irritated with the contest, and the opprobrious
language heaped upon himself and his master, Hector had been provoked
to strike the most insolent of the disputants. Immediately several had
fallen upon him at once, and it was owing to the uncommon strength and
dexterity he possessed, that he had escaped alive out of their hands.
Beside innumerable blows with fist, foot, and stick, he had received
two or three stabs in different parts of the body, from the knives
with which the Italian is too much accustomed to assail his adversary.
It was easy to see that the gallant and generous defence of Hector
had considerably augmented the danger of my situation. They dismissed
him with a thousand execrations against both him and myself, and
vows that they would signalise their vengeance by setting fire to my
house. Having related his story, Hector concluded with again earnestly
conjuring me to kill him, that so he might expiate the imprudence and
folly by which he had made himself the author of my calamity.

The excessiveness of the poor fellow’s distress excited me to employ
every effort to pacify his mind. “Hector,” said I, “you have been
very imprudent, but I foresee no such consequences as your terrified
imagination has led you to forebode. The idle threats of clowns in
the midst of their brawls are entitled to little regard. I am not so
weak and infirm of soul as to be moved from my tranquillity by their
senseless prate. I entertain no doubt of your fidelity and affection.
I am not angry with you. The fault you have been guilty of, arose
from no defect of vigilance or attachment. You did what you could,
and where you failed, it was only in that to which your powers were
not commensurate. You have done well and wisely now, in acquainting
me with particulars and the whole extent of the danger: doubt not but
I will employ such precautions and be so awake to my situation, as to
forestall the possibility of mischief.”

Thus I endeavoured to assuage honest Hector’s perturbation, but with
no adequate effect. He hung his head in sorrow, and refused to be
comforted. Shame and terror assailed him together, and he knew not how
to support their united pressure. He intreated me not to lull myself in
fancied security, and fall blindfold on my ruin. He entreated me not
to forgive him. My clemency and forbearance served only to make him
regard with greater horror the crime of which he had been guilty. If
however I refused to punish him, and by penance or death to lighten the
remorse that hung upon his heart, he would at least devote himself in
opposition to the evil he had created, and die rather than it should
touch a hair of our heads. This idea he seemed to view with some
complacency; but the pleasure it gave was a glimmering and momentary
light; he could not remain in any place for an instant; he wrung his
hands with anguish, and exhibited every feature of the deepest despair.
I examined his bruises and wounds, the latter of which, though attended
with a copious effusion of blood, did not appear to be dangerous. I
warned him to be guilty of no further indiscretion, to betray nothing
of what had happened to any one of my family, and to engage in no
further controversies and broils in my vindication.

Though I endeavoured to make light of what I heard in compassion to
the distress of my servant, yet, when I came to reconsider the subject
in solitude, it by no means appeared to me in a light and trivial
point of view. One part of Hector’s story had related to the death
of Charon, who, I now found, had owed his fate to the superstition
of my uncultivated neighbours. I had always entertained a formidable
idea of the character of an Italian populace, whom I regarded as
more suspicious, sanguinary, and violent than any other race of men
in the world. I deplored my fate that exposed me to their rage. I
deplored my folly that had admitted any confidant into my individual
pursuits, though my confidence had been so limited, and its receiver
so trustworthy, that I could not have imagined any evil would have
resulted. I determined that I would not expose myself to the risk of
such sinister consequences, as in my opinion might in my present
situation easily overtake me. I grieved for the tender health and the
doubtful state of mind of my beloved Marguerite, which alone opposed
themselves to the adoption of an immediate change of scene. In the
state of her health I had been grievously disappointed. I had looked
for amendment; I found decay. The decay however was gradual, almost
imperceptible; from time to time I had even flattered myself that
the progress was in an opposite direction; but the delusion was soon
banished. Another difficulty arose in addition to the rest; Marguerite
appeared pregnant; a circumstance that now first presented itself after
a cessation of ten years.

The morning after the accident and disclosure of Hector I went to Pisa,
determined to consult with the marchese Filosanto, elder brother of
the unfortunate Andrea, who was probably more accurately acquainted
with the Italian character than myself, and understood the shades of
that character, as they were modified in the particular territory
in which I resided. The marchese was a man universally admired for
subtlety of reasoning, vigorousness of comprehension, and refinement
of taste. In the structure of his mind he was scarcely an Italian.
He had resided several years in England, and was the intimate friend
of Henry Howard earl of Surrey, who some time after fell a victim to
the jealous tyranny of his native sovereign, king Henry the Eighth.
The marchese was frank, generous and disinterested, and possessed
more fully the affections of every one within the circle of his
friendship than any other man I ever knew. He was of a sanguine temper,
always contemplating the world on its brightest side; and, from the
generosity of his own heart, incapable of crediting a distant danger,
or of discerning the storm in the embryo cloud where it was silently
engendering.

In the conference we held, I was influenced too implicitly by my
consciousness of his integrity and the gigantic powers of his mind, and
did not sufficiently advert to those peculiarities in his temper which
I have now described. The external facts with which the narrative of
Hector had furnished me I fully detailed to him; as to my particular
pursuits, I contented myself with stating that I indulged freely in
the study of chemistry, and was of those persons, ordinarily accounted
visionaries, who amused themselves with the expectation of finding the
philosopher’s stone. Having heard my story to an end, the marchese
ridiculed my apprehensions. He saw nothing in the facts that alarmed
me, but a cowardly superstition whose utmost flight reached no higher
than the shooting a dog, and a squabble between a boisterous rustic,
and a servant too acutely sensitive for the reputation of his master.
He assured me that the days of such superstition as I contemplated were
long since past, and that his countrymen less deserved the imputation
than any others, as, living at the very centre and source of catholic
imposition, they saw deeper into the mystery, and were not exposed to
the advantage which distance possesses for augmenting our reverence.
He expatiated with great eloquence on the vice of a suspicious temper.
A spirit of alarm and continual apprehension, like the jealousy of
lovers, he said, made the meat it fed on. It brooded over plots that
had no existence but in the wanderings of a disturbed imagination.
It was continually interrupting the quiet of its owner, and the
tranquillity of society; and, for the sake of avoiding imaginary
evils, often plunged into such as were real. He advised me to go home
and be contented. He recommended to me to clear up the clouds of my
mind, and cultivate a light heart, a cheerful temper, and a generous
confidence in the honest sympathies of mankind. In fine, he bade me
continue my pursuits, avoid éclat, and trust in his sagacity that no
ill consequences would ensue.

The remonstrances of the marchese Filosanto led me to suspect that I
had been idly credulous. I had too easily participated the feelings
and apprehensions of a poor uninstructed negro, and had suffered the
secret griefs that brooded in my heart, to discolour my perceptions,
and aggravate the features of circumstances in themselves trifling
or indifferent. I began to be half ashamed of the gloominess of my
conceptions. I could not, alas! follow the advice of the marchese as
to the cheerfulness of my heart; but I could exert myself to prevent
my present melancholy from disfiguring to me every thing I saw. The
influence exercised over my conceptions by persons of eminent intellect
has always been great. Not that the judgment I formed of the powers of
my own mind was peculiarly humble; but I reasoned thus. Perhaps the
person I consult is as well informed in the subject under consideration
as I am, in that case his decision is as fully entitled to attention
as my own; and thus, without cowardly self-contempt on my part, the
general balance of the argument was materially altered. Perhaps,
without being on the whole my superior, he may be more competent to
this particular question. In either case my idea of its merits became
perceptibly modified. I never listened to the sentiments of a man of
talents when they differed from my own, unless where he was evidently
visionary and irrational, without being shaken as to the credit due to
my own view of the subject.

Such then was the effect produced on me by the marchese’s
expostulation. I shook off my apprehensions, and laughed at my fears.
I was ashamed of the want of gallantry that had possessed me, when I
meditated flight from so trivial a menace. I concluded that dangers,
particularly such as arise from the irrational passions of a capricious
multitude, were increased when symptoms of apprehension discovered
themselves, and abated, when received with neglect or repelled with a
magnanimous serenity.




CHAPTER XXVII.


Meanwhile the unrelenting Agostino was fixed in his purpose and
incessant in his machinations. He believed that the destructive mine
was now sufficiently prepared, and that he might proceed in all surety
to the ultimate explosion. He apprehended that he had advanced too far
to retract, that the death of Charon and the assault upon Hector were
calculated sufficiently to announce what was to follow, and that it
would be injudicious and idle to grant me much respite for reflection.
The passions of his associates were wrought up to a frenzy of horror,
and needed only a bold and artful director to urge them to any point
of fury and destruction.

Implicitly as I had confided in the decision of the marchese, I had
speedily reason to know that it was the dictate of too sanguine and
presumptuous a spirit. On my return from his palace, and, on several
subsequent occasions, I found the manners of the populace altered
respecting me. They no longer viewed me with a sort of reverential awe,
or fled my approach. They insulted me with their eyes, they muttered
curses upon me in a voice sufficiently audible to be understood, they
broke forth in gestures of abhorrence and derision. They regarded me
with looks of ferocious hatred; and when I had passed them, their
murmurs gradually swelled into shouts of triumphant contumely. These
symptoms however were progressive; each day became more odious and
intolerable than the last. They who have never been placed in a
situation like mine, will never be able to do justice to my grievance.
They will perhaps say, that the calamity I now endured was a trifling
one, and that a weak mind only can be elevated by the acclamations and
huzzas of the multitude, or depressed by their hisses and scorn. I did
not, and I could not, feel it so. There is no pleasure more congenial
to the human heart, than the approbation and affection of our fellows.
I call heaven to witness that I could mount the scaffold, surrounded
with an innumerable multitude to applaud my fortitude, and to feel
as it were on their own neck the blow that ended me, and count it a
festival. But I cannot bear to be surrounded with tokens of abhorrence
and scorn. I cannot bear to look round me through an extended circle,
and see the impatience of despite in every face. Man was not born to
live alone. He is linked to his brethren by a thousand ties; and, when
those ties are broken, he ceases from all genuine existence. Their
complacence is a food more invigorating than ambrosia; their aversion
is a torment worse than that of the damned. While I write, I seem
again to hear resounding in my ears the hootings and clamours of these
infatuated peasants. When heard indeed, they went to my heart, and
sat there colder than the aspic’s venom: they rose to my throat with
a sensation bitterer than wormwood. They unstrung all my muscles and
nerves. I could not stay; I could not fly. I wished myself buried deep
in the centre of the earth. I felt something worse, more revolting,
more opposite to all the prejudices and propensities of the soul,
than annihilation. I have known in various situations and conditions
of human life, what it was to be distressed, to be dejected, to be
miserable; but never in any other situation have I felt a misery so
concentrated, so gnawing and insufferable.

I began however, like the critics I am figuring to myself, to despise
the pusillanimity of my submission, and to believe that, if I would
only make a stand and turn round upon my enemy, I should subdue him.
This resolution I could with difficulty have taken in the moment of
attack; it was formed in an interval of retrospect and reflection.
Having formed it, the contempt I should have felt for myself would have
been too exquisite, if I had failed to put it in execution. I was not
long at a loss for an opportunity. In one of my walks I found myself
pursued by a numerous populace with a peculiar degree of inveteracy. I
yielded for some time, till I came to a place that appeared convenient
for the purpose of haranguing them. It was a bench, placed upon a
rising ground and sheltered behind by a thicket, which had been erected
for the purpose of commanding a neighbouring prospect. I stopped; I
stepped upon the bench; I waved my hand towards the multitude. They
perceived my purpose with some degree of confusion and surprise; they
drew nearer. “Do not listen to him! Do not hear a word he has to say!”
cried some of them. “Oh, hear him! hear him!” exclaimed others. I
obtained an audience.

“What is the cause,” said I, “of all this hatred and persecution?”

“Because you are a wizard, a necromancer, a dealer in the black art;
because you are in league with hell, and have sold yourself to the
devil!” answered twenty voices at once.

“Hear me,” replied I, “and I will convince you of my innocence: but
hear me in silence, and do not interrupt me.”

“For myself, I have no belief in the existence of such an art.”

This remark produced a general groan.

“Why should I have sold myself to the foe of mankind? What could he
give me, that should compensate me for consigning myself over to him
for ever hereafter? The power of exhibiting strange and extraordinary
tricks. What a pitiful recompence? But, if I had bought this power at
so dear a price, should I hide it? Should I not take every opportunity
of exciting your reverence and astonishment? Who has seen me perform
any wonderful feat? I live quietly among you, and give no cause of
offence to any. I live retired in the midst of my family. I form no
party or connections. I do not intrude into any of your affairs,
political or private. I do not even enter into conferences with any of
you, unless induced by the apparent occasion of doing some good and
benevolent action.

“Quit then this ungenerous persecution! Do not turn the fury of your
resentment upon a harmless stranger! You are Italians, the most
polished and ingenious people on the face of the earth: the most
glorious monuments of art, in building, in statuary, and in painting,
are to be found in the midst of you: ancient Italy governed the world
by her arms; modern Italy governs the world through the medium of that
pure and sublime religion of which Providence has graciously made
her the repository. Do not stain the glory of this character! Show
yourselves worthy of the honour with which your name is heard in every
corner of the habitable world!”

While I was yet speaking, a large clot of mud reached me, and struck me
on the face and the upper part of my breast. I calmly endeavoured to
free myself from its effects with my handkerchief; and, looking round
me, demanded, in the sacred spirit of conscious innocence, “How have I
deserved this treatment?”

Thus far I had been heard with a doubtful sentiment of murmur and
approbation, and I began to feel that I was rather gaining ground upon
my audience. But this new insult seemed to turn the tide of popular
impression in an instant.

“Villain, renegado, accursed of God!” I heard from every side; “did not
you bewitch my cow? did not you enchant my child? have not you killed
my daughter? Down with him! exterminate him! do not suffer him to live!”

I continued my efforts to be heard. It was a critical moment, a last
experiment upon the power of firmness and innocence to control the
madness of infuriated superstition. It was in vain. I was deafened
with the noise that assailed me. It was no longer shouts and clamours
of disapprobation. It was the roaring of tigers, and the shriek of
cannibals. Sticks, stones, and every kind of missile weapon that
offered itself, fell in showers around me. It seemed a sort of miracle
that I escaped instant destruction. I eluded their pursuit: after
some time I ventured to return to my own house. I had in the interval
terrified myself with the idea that, having missed my person, they
might have hurried thither, and executed some terrible vengeance on my
helpless family. I found them however in safety: the mob had for this
time contented itself to disperse without further mischief.

As soon as it was dark, I hastened to Pisa, and related what had just
occurred to my friend the marchese. He was surprised; but he still
adhered to his opinion. He had never supposed, he told me, that a noisy
and clamorous mob was a proper subject upon which to make experiment of
the energy of truth; and he laughed at my attempt to reason them out
of their superstition. But they meant nothing by all that had passed.
It was the mere foam and fury of a moment, poured out with vehemence,
and then dissipated in air. A certain set of politicians had for
their particular ends represented a mob as a terrific and formidable
engine: alas! they were rather to be pitied than condemned. There
was no malice in their hearts. They were in reality a mere material
machine, led on without reflection, and, when they had committed a
momentary ravage, astonished themselves the most at the injury they had
perpetrated. They were as light and variable as a feather, driven with
every breath; and nothing could argue greater obliquity of intellect
than to suppose, because they were in a certain temper and sentiment
to-day, that they would be found in a similar temper and sentiment
to-morrow. The marchese however wished, he said, to relieve me from
the apprehension of this imaginary danger, and therefore offered me
the whole suite of his servants for the defence of my house. He added
that, among his friends and retainers in the city of Pisa, he did not
doubt in an hour’s time to be able to raise a troop of four hundred
men; and, whatever power of that sort he possessed, he assured me was
wholly at my service. I was not convinced by the marchese’s arguments,
but I declined his offer. I could not bear to think that blood should
be spilled, and the lives of these poor ignorant wretches sacrificed,
for the preservation of a thing so worthless in my eyes as the local
property I possessed. I therefore told the marchese, that I might
perhaps wait yet a day or two longer before I formed my resolution;
but that, the instant I saw one fresh symptom of the hostility of the
villagers, I was determined to take my family with me, and remove far
beyond the reach both of their terrors and their hatred.

I staid two hours with the marchese, and then set out to my own house.
The way I took was by a private road, open only to the neighbouring
gentry, but of which my servant carried the key. It led along the
higher ground, and commanded a view of the common highway. Considerably
before I reached my own habitation, I was struck with the appearance
of persons passing, in considerable numbers, and in a tumultuous
manner, along the public road. Some of them were armed with clubs, and
others with torches. Their march however led, not towards my house,
but in an opposite direction. I mended my pace, terrified with a sort
of vague apprehension of what might have happened, though I did not
disguise to myself that what I saw was not precisely that which I might
have expected to see, if they had been returned from demolishing my
property, and burning my house.

When I arrived, I found indeed that no mischief had been actually
committed, but that I was indebted for the preservation of my house,
and perhaps for the lives of my wife and children, to the sagacity
and presence of mind of Bernardin, the servant of my early years. My
residence had been the object against which the march of the populace
had been directed. Bernardin, perceiving their intentions, had with
great difficulty prevailed upon Hector to keep out of sight. Nothing
could be more adverse to the feelings and inclination of my faithful
negro; but, Bernardin having convinced him that his appearance would
only exasperate the rage of the assailants, and that perhaps every
thing of importance to his master’s service and happiness depended at
present upon his concealment, Hector yielded to his representations.
This accomplished, Bernardin next assembled the gardener and one or two
labourers in my employment, who happened to be at hand; and, having
furnished them with fire-arms, stationed them at different windows, in
the front of the house. With these preparations, when the mob arrived
he resolutely told them that he would fire on the first person that
attempted to break in. They were staggered: furious as they appeared
the moment before, this threat held them in awe. They paraded two or
three times round the house, clattering their arms, and pouring out
vehement execrations; and then withdrew, solemnly promising that they
would return the following night, and level the house with the ground.

I no longer yielded the smallest degree of credit to the unsuspicious
and confiding philosophy of the marchese Filosanto. I sent off my wife
and children before daybreak for Lucca, determined to take shipping
at the first convenient port, and pass over into Spain. I was little
solicitous, for reasons with which the reader is already acquainted,
about my property and moveables: I had no motive to induce me to fetter
and clog my retreat, at this hour of peril and terror, with a single
article of rarity and price. My furniture indeed was not splendid,
but it was handsome and valuable; and the indifference with which
I resigned the whole to the mercy of chance, was a matter of some
surprise to the persons around me. My servants offered to defend my
possessions, at the peril of their lives; but I peremptorily forbade
it. I would not even consent to their taking away certain articles, by
way of appropriating them to their personal use. I believed that if I
admitted a single act of that sort, I should find it no easy matter
to set limits to their avidity; and, as I had determined to take none
of my present servants with me, the negro and Bernardin excepted, I
feared that the apparent possession of a single article that had been
mine might hereafter mark its proprietor a victim to the senseless
rage of blindfold superstition. I could easily make up to these honest
and faithful dependants the injury they might sustain from the seeming
severity of this order. I determined to shut up my house, with all
its present contents, as Joshua, the captain of the Jews, drew a line
of separation round the profane possessions of Achan; and to leave
the villagers, if so it seemed good to them, to make of the whole a
burnt-offering, to propitiate the wrath of their avenging divinity.

The directions I issued being unhesitating and peremptory, met with a
ready submission from all my other domestics: Hector only, the mild and
complying Hector, of whom obedience had hitherto appeared to constitute
the very soul, met my commands with a resolute refusal. The present
distressed appearance of my fortunes seemed to have worked the poor
fellow’s mind to a paroxysm of insanity. He considered himself as the
sole author of my calamity. He reviled himself in the bitterest terms
of compunction and abhorrence. The language which the agony of his
soul forced from his lips, was such as could not fail to impress upon
my other servants a conviction of the justice of the imputations that
were now brought against us. This however was of little importance.
I must at all events have been contented to leave behind me, in my
present neighbourhood, a name loaded with the execrations of religious
fanaticism. Hector imprecated upon himself a thousand curses, if, so
long as he continued to live, the populace should lay hands upon a
straw of my property. He would not move so much as an inch from the
defence of my house. He would either, by preserving it, expiate in some
degree the mischief in which he had involved me, or fall and be crushed
to death in the midst of its ruins. Arguments and expostulations
were useless here: his mind was worked up to too high a tone, to be
susceptible of the patience necessary for hearing or understanding
any reasoning that was addressed to him. Authority itself was of no
avail: for the first and the last time he threw off the character of a
servant, and appeared obstinate, self-willed, and ungovernable. It was
only by direct violence that he could be forced from the spot. I gave
him in charge, with the most strict orders not to suffer him to escape
from their custody, to two of his fellows.

This business being despatched, I went, at the invitation of the
marchese, to a small cottage he possessed at no great distance from my
own house. Its situation was so private and retired, that few persons
knew or could perceive that there was any building on the spot. Here
therefore I could remain in the most perfect safety. I felt myself
unaccountably impelled to stay and witness the catastrophe of the
tragedy. I should not have been satisfied to continue in uncertainty as
to what it would prove. After all that had passed, like the marchese, I
should have been apt to accuse myself of cowardice, and a mind soured
and degenerate, if the mob had not put their threats in execution.
The marchese himself was well pleased with my determination in this
respect. He was not yet convinced that I had not painted to myself a
danger, which had no adequate counterpart in the world of realities.

I had not long to wait. The night had no sooner spread an even-coloured
and almost impervious veil over the world, than the marchese, as if
moved by a secret impulse to witness what he yet refused to believe,
came to me at the cottage. He had scarcely arrived, when he heard the
confused murmurs and turbulence of the populace; for we were near
enough to distinguish almost every thing. As they did not meet with
the defence of the preceding evening, the work they had undertaken
was presently despatched. We saw the flames ascend. We recognised the
shouts of infernal joy with which they witnessed the catastrophe.
When the marchese beheld what, till seen, he would never admit to be
possible, he burst out into a sort of transport of misanthropy. He
exclaimed that no innocence, and no merit, could defend a man from the
unrelenting antipathy of his fellows. He saw that there was a principle
in the human mind destined to be eternally at war with improvement
and science. No sooner did a man devote himself to the pursuit of
discoveries which, if ascertained, would prove the highest benefit
to his species, than his whole species became armed against him. The
midnight oil was held to be the signal of infernal machinations. The
paleness of study and the furrows of thought were adjudged to be the
tokens of diabolical alliance. He saw, in the transactions of that
night, a pledge of the eternal triumph of ignorance over wisdom. Above
all, he regretted that his countrymen, his dear Italians, should for
ever blot their honour and their character by such savage outrages.
Though myself the principal sufferer, I was obliged to perform the part
of the comforter and consoler, and endeavour to calm the transport of
agony that seized upon the susceptible Filosanto. He was astonished,
shocked, and beside himself: I viewed the whole with the gloomy
firmness of a desperate resolution.

The worst event of this detested evening remains yet unrecorded. Even
now I tremble, while I attempt to commit the story to my harmless
paper. So far as related to the mere destruction of my property, I
looked on with a philosophical indifference. I had no reason, and I
disdained to regret the loss of that which I had it in my power to
repair in a moment. I thought I had taken care that no human life
should be risqued upon this critical occasion. But I was mistaken.
I learned the next morning with anguish inexpressible that Hector,
the negro of the prison of Constance, was no more. He had eluded
the vigilance of his keepers. No sooner was he at liberty, then he
hastened, unknown to every one, to die, as he had declared he would, in
the defence of my house. The mob had burst into the house; they seized
him alive. They dragged him out in the midst of them; they insulted
over him, as the special favourite of the infernal king. They inflicted
on him every species of mockery and of torture; they killed him joint
by joint, and limb by limb.----The pen drops from my lifeless hand.

What right had I to make this man the victim of my idle and unhallowed
pursuits? What has the art and multiplication of gold in it, that
should compensate the destruction of so ingenuous, so simple-hearted,
so noble a creature? If I had myself fallen into the hands of the
populace, it had been well: I was a criminal, worthy of every
retribution they could inflict upon me! Some men perhaps will ask,
why I lamented so bitterly over so uncultivated and uninformed an
individual as this negro. There was however something so truly tragical
in the fate to which this creature in his generosity and remorse
devoted himself, that I believe for the moment I felt a sharper pang
in it, than in the strange and extraordinary loss of my only son, or
perhaps in the premature death of my beloved Marguerite.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


Before the dawn of the succeeding morning I turned my face towards
Lucca. I beheld the last cloud of mingling smoke and flame ascend
from the ashes of my villa. The blaze sunk, its materials were nearly
consumed, and it yielded an uncertain and fitful light only, when
I withdrew from being any longer the melancholy and heart-wounded
spectator of the ruin. I took an everlasting leave of the marchese. I
had been introduced to him under a friendly aspect, as the man who had
had courage to perform the last offices of humanity to his unfortunate
brother; and he had conceived a warm affection for me. The painful
nature of the catastrophe he had witnessed melted his heart, and he
earnestly pressed me to draw upon him for any supplies I wanted,
or rather to receive from him a sum equivalent to the damage the
superstition of his countrymen had inflicted on me. This I positively
refused; but I found it impossible to silence his importunity, till I
submitted to the duplicity of promising that, if I found myself reduced
to any necessity, I would not fail to apply to him. It was in the very
moment of our separation that intelligence was brought me of the fate
of Hector. The reader may imagine with how heavy a heart I set out on
my journey.

Lucca is about seventeen miles from the city of Pisa; from the
place where I had spent the greater part of this memorable night it
was twenty. The marchese made me promise to take a serpentine and
circuitous route, the more completely to elude the possibility of
future danger. An adventure occurred to me in this passage, with the
relation of which I will not interrupt my narrative, which prevented me
from arriving at Lucca till the noon of the following day. Suffice it
to say, that it was of such a nature, that, impatient as I was under my
present extraordinary circumstances to rejoin my family, I should have
held myself destitute of every atom of humanity, if I had not submitted
to this short delay.

Short as it was, I found, when I reached Lucca, that my evil genius
had been busy to accumulate for me new misfortunes. Marguerite and her
daughters were wholly unknown in this place; and the intelligence of
the Pisan riot having reached Lucca in the course of the day, it was
related to my wife, as to a hearer unconcerned, with all its horrid
circumstances and the calamitous fate of our generous Hector, by the
hostess of the inn. The rapidity of events, during the last part of
our residence in the Pisan territory, was such as to have obliged me
to say little of the effect they produced upon Marguerite. But the
reader can scarcely be so inadvertent and unreflecting, as not easily
to imagine to himself that she felt them in the highest degree painful
and overwhelming. This last blow was too much. Marguerite had been some
months pregnant. She was immediately seized with the pains of labour,
and delivered of a dead child. The first intelligence communicated to
me upon my arrival was that my wife was dying.

Lucca however did not witness the period of her existence. After having
continued for several days upon the very extremity, as it were, between
life and death, she grew perceptibly better; and in a week more, though
in a very feeble state, it became apparent that her case was not a
rapid one. We agreed to proceed upon our Spanish voyage. It appeared
not improbable that the sea-air might be found beneficial, and the
experiment was warmly recommended by her physicians. They were not
however aware of the whole extent of her disorder. During the voyage
her crisis returned with such malignant symptoms, as scarcely to permit
us the hope she would reach the land alive. We debarked at Barcelona on
the 14th of April 1546.

We had no sooner taken up our abode in this city than, fully aware
of the state of her disease, she assembled her daughters, and poured
forth to them without restraint that flood of affection, that ardent
spirit of love, by which she was distinguished and elevated above
every creature that lived. Her mind was clear, her intellectual powers
were complete and entire. The enthusiasm with which she now expressed
herself was not of that inconsiderate nature which should tend to make
them feel with greater acuteness the loss they were about to sustain.
It was bright, unclouded and serene. It was the eloquence as of a
disembodied spirit, freed from the perturbation and alloy of human
passions. She reminded them that they were sisters, and exhorted each
to fulfil the duties of a sister and a mother to the other two. If
wise and good, they would be happy in each other, and their little
association would be a school, preparing them for the more genuine and
venerable duties for which nature had destined them. Her views of all
human things were altered by her present situation on the brink of the
grave. Our reserves and misunderstandings had wrung her heart; but she
forgave me. Things which had lately appeared of the highest magnitude
and moment, faded in the distance, and mingled with the vulgar crowd
of human concerns which was now retiring from her view: she must again
return, she said, to life, before she could again feel the passions
and the interests of this petty scene. For the sake of her daughters
she had lately desired to live. She was now reconciled and content to
die. She had formed the chain and link of connection between me and
my girls; perhaps it was better that we should burst our fetters and
be free. On the fourth day after our arrival at Barcelona Marguerite
expired.

There is nothing in the vast variety of objects which this wretched
world presents to our view so dreadful and distressing as the sight of
one we have loved, but who is now no more. I saw, these eyes beheld,
the lifeless corse of Marguerite. Great God of heaven! what is man?
and of what are we made? Within that petty frame resided for years all
that we worship, for there resided all that we know and can conceive of
excellence. That heart is now still. Within the whole extent of that
frame there exists no thought, no feeling, no virtue. It remains no
longer, but to mock my sense and scoff at my sorrow, to rend my bosom
with a woe, complicated, matchless and inexpressible. The cheek is pale
and livid; the eyes are sunk and circled with blackness. Corruption
and ruin have already seized their prey and turned it into horror.
Draw, for heaven’s sake, draw the pall over those lifeless features!
Bury, bury them deep in the bowels of the earth! Let not my imagination
follow them into the chambers of the grave, and dwell amidst
pestilential damps and all the series of destruction! Let me recollect
all that Marguerite was as she lived, her numerous accomplishments,
her unparalleled virtues,--ay, in all the magnitude and wealth of
their detail,--for that is a divine and celestial madness: but let me
not recollect her as I saw her on the bier, lest I become raving and
blaspheme!

I have no power to talk of the situation in which I was now placed, and
the reader must therefore explain it for himself,--if he can. I never
loved but once; I never loved but Marguerite. All other affection is
stillness and ice compared with this. This is the great crisis of my
history, the gap between life and death, the gulf that cut me off for
ever from every thing that deserves the name of human. Such was the
legacy of the stranger! my son an exile, myself publicly arraigned as
a murderer, the unmerited and tragical death of Hector, the premature
and self-deriving loss of the better half of my soul! Who would have
believed that this envenomed gift would, in less than two years, have
thus dreadfully changed the face of my affairs, and destroyed every
thing that composed the happiness of my life?

After some delay in this wretched and ill-omened town of Barcelona
(such it has ever since appeared to my thoughts), we proceeded to
Madrid. The reader will give me credit, when I tell him that, however
eager I had lately felt to exhibit my magnificence and my wealth,
I had no such eagerness now. I speak no more of the character of
Marguerite; I attempt not to compose her panegyric. The story of her
life is the best record of her virtues. Her defects, if defects she
had, drew their pedigree from rectitude of sentiment and perception,
from the most generous sensibility, from a heart pervaded and leavened
with tenderness. A simple stone in the western aisle of the great
church at Barcelona records her personal and her family name, with this
single addition, THE PRESERVER OF HER FAMILY IN POVERTY AND RUIN, THE
VICTIM OF HER DISCONSOLATE AND REPENTANT HUSBAND’S UNHALLOWED WEALTH.

But, dismissing for ever, and henceforth consigning to unviolated
silence her excellencies, could I avoid feeling that I could never
again form a similar, or indeed any real union, so long as I existed?
Being now indeed more than forty years of age, having spent near twenty
of that forty in a most enviable wedlock, and being blessed with a
sufficiently numerous offspring, it may be thought perhaps I might be
contented. But, without discussing the propriety of such a maxim as it
relates to the species in general, it must be recollected in my case
that my youth was to be recommenced by a perpetual series of renewals.
I never gave credit to that axiom of a sickly sensibility, that it is a
sacrilege, in him who has been engaged in one cordial and happy union,
ever to turn his thoughts to another. Much more reasonable than this is
the Indian doctrine, that the survivor ought to leap into the flames,
and perish upon the funeral pyre of the deceased. While we live, it
is one of our most imperious duties to seek our happiness. He that
dedicates his days to an endless sorrow is the worst and most degraded
of suicides. It is an important question in the economy of human life,
up to what age we should allow ourselves to contract engagements to a
wife and a probable offspring: but, separately from this consideration,
I should hold that in many cases he who entered into a second marriage,
by that action yielded a pure and honourable homage to the manes of the
first. But from genuine marriage I was henceforth for ever debarred.
An immortal can form no true and real attachment to the insect of an
hour.

Mourning, a depressing and speechless regret, was yet the inmate of our
house. Grief does not commonly lay a strong and invincible hold of us
in the morning of our days; and, though the temper of Julia was perhaps
at her age the most tender and susceptible I ever knew, even she, who
was now in her seventeenth year, reaped the benefit of that elasticity
which in early life is the portion of humanity. Nothing material
occurred to us in the first three months of our residence in Madrid.
It was impossible for any one to be surrounded with a more lovely and
blooming family than I was.

Yet from happiness I was immeasurably distant. Exclusively of my recent
and in every sense irreparable loss, my mind was full of dark and
gloomy forebodings. I feared not for myself, but I had an unconquerable
alarm and apprehension for my children. My youngest was but ten years
of age; the eldest was not seventeen. Sweet, tender blossoms, that
the cruelty and hardness of mankind might so easily blight, and that
required a concurrence of favourable circumstances to ripen into all
they were capable of becoming! When I recollected what had happened in
the course of the last two years, I could not flatter myself that our
misfortunes were at an end, or that I had not, to speak moderately,
many fierce trials yet to encounter. I seemed, like the far-famed
tree of Java, to be destined to shelter only to destroy, and to prove
a deadly poison to whatever sought its refuge under my protecting
branches. In this melancholy frame of mind the last words of my
adored Marguerite passed and repassed ten thousand times through my
recollection. “She had formed the chain and link of connection between
me and my girls; perhaps it was better that we should burst our fetters
and be free.”

Whatever she had said was sacred to the present temper of my
imagination: her last behest I would have died to execute. The idea
contained in the sentence I have just repeated was ambiguous and
obscure, rather hinted, than expressed. But was it worthy of the
less attention, because its author, with her usual gentleness and
sweetness, had modestly suggested an advice, instead, which she was
well entitled to have done, of prescribing a will? I determined to
part with my children, that I might no longer be to them a source of
corroding misery and affliction. I believed that the cloud that now
oppressed me was transitory. I seemed pursued for the present by a
malignant genius; but a man, endowed as I was with unbounded wealth and
immortal vigour, cannot easily be reduced to despair. When the tide of
my prosperity should unfold its rich and ample current, I might easily
communicate of its bounty to my daughters. If I parted with them now, I
did not lose them as I had perhaps lost their brother for ever. I could
turn to a particular point, and say, “There lies my soul!” I could cast
my eye upon a projection of the globe, and put my finger upon their
residence. Wherever I wandered, whether I were plunged in a dungeon or
mounted a throne, my heart, like the mariner’s needle, would tremble
towards that point as its cynosure. I had still something to love,
something to pant for, something to dream about, and be happy.

Having ruminated insatiably upon the last expressions of Marguerite,
having formed my commentary, and fixed my predilection, I recollected
a person, then a young woman upon my paternal estate, for whom my
wife had conceived a remarkable friendship. She was the daughter
of a peasant, her birth had been low, and her education confined.
But she had taste, she had discretion, she had integrity, I think I
may add, she had genius. As Marguerite had discovered her merits,
and distinguished her from her equals, she had been of great use to
this extraordinary rustic in unfolding her mind, and guiding her
propensities. This was not so much a matter of deliberate and meditated
purpose in _la dame du seigneur_; it rose out of the circumstances of
their situation. They were almost of an age; and Marguerite frequently
invited her to be the associate of her studies and amusements. Mariana,
that was her name, did not perhaps resemble my wife considerably in her
features, but her stature was the same, her complexion and the colour
of her hair. The similarity in carriage and gesture, Mariana having
never had an opportunity of contemplating the accomplishments she
admired in any one but madame de St. Leon, was still more striking.
There were points indeed in which no human creature could compare with
Marguerite, the expressive and flexible tone of her voice, and those
cadences, which sprung from, and communicated to every susceptible
hearer, the divinest sensibility. One of the unhappy consequences
of our exile from the Bordelois was the misfortunes of Mariana. Her
father had fallen to decay. To relieve his distress she had contracted
a marriage, not of sentiment and predilection, but with a man who had
promised her that her father should never come to want. This marriage
had been unhappy. The husband was a prodigal and a profligate. A period
of seven years however delivered her from her Egyptian bondage. She
had but lately become a widow; and the prudence and integrity of her
conduct had rendered this alliance, which to many women would have
proved a rock of destruction, an additional source of honour and
respect. Mariana, at the death of her husband, had no children; she had
buried her father; she was consequently entirely alone.

It was this woman I fixed upon as the protector of my daughters. I was
better pleased with the meanness of her extraction, than I should have
been with one of the high-born descendants of the houses of St. Leon
or Damville, had it been my fortune to have had in the female line any
near relations on either side. My daughters were no longer children;
they were singularly prudent, considerate, and unimpeachable in their
conduct and propensities. They wanted a protector in the eye of the
world; it was desirable for them that they should have an adviser; but
I should have been grieved and mortified to give them a dictator.

I wrote to Mariana Chabot, communicating my project, and requesting her
to give us the meeting at St. Lizier on the frontiers of France. She
was delighted with the office I tendered to her acceptance, and readily
consented to every thing I required. I conducted my daughters to the
place of rendezvous without imparting to them the design by which I
was actuated; I believed that they would of their own motion conceive
a partiality for the friend of their mother. I was not deceived in my
prognostic; the meeting was an interesting one. The eyes of Mariana
overflowed at meeting, after so long an interval, the husband and
progeny of the dearest and most revered friend she had ever known; the
mourning we wore reminded her how lately her incomparable patroness had
been committed to the grave. My girls were struck with the resemblance
of Mariana to their mother. Accident had prevented us from cultivating
almost any intimate connections out of our own family from the period
of our exile; my girls had therefore never met with a person who
approached in any degree so near their mother in accomplishments, in
skill, in turn of thinking and opinion. Mariana came up to my warmest
hopes as a protector and companion for my children; her unhappy
marriage, by concentrating her thoughts and expectations in herself,
had perhaps rendered her more exemplary in carriage, and more elevated
in sentiment, than she would ever have been without it.

At St. Lizier I passed myself for monsieur Valmier, the guardian of
the orphan heiresses of St. Leon. It fortunately happened that my
paternal estate was at this time upon sale. I determined to become the
purchaser, and to settle my girls in the scene of their nativity. I
procured an agent, and despatched him with an ample commission for that
purpose. Having adjusted this point, I resolved to make a tour with my
daughters, through Languedoc, Dauphiné, and the provinces usually known
by the denomination of the south of France. I wished to familiarise
them to the society of madame Chabot, and to assist them in discerning
her merits under a variety of points of view. I asked them whether they
would not be delighted to obtain her as a companion, who might assist
and conduct them in such points as only a woman of understanding and
experience is competent to. They, every one of them, listened to the
idea with pleasure.

At length I received the information that the purchase of St. Leon was
completed, and I proceeded to the critical disclosure that my daughters
were on the point of being separated from their father. They listened
to the communication with astonishment and terror. They had entered
successively into the feelings of their deceased mother, and I am well
persuaded felt a less ardent attachment to my person than they had done
at the cottage of the lake of Constance. But, culpable and criminal as
I had been, I was not destitute of every virtue, and they could not
extinguish in themselves the respect they had so long entertained for
me. Habit has a resistless empire over the human mind; and, when we
reflect with how much reluctance we consent to the removal of a tree
or a hedge, to the sight of which we have been accustomed, it will not
be wondered at that my daughters could not calmly think of so complete
a separation from their father. The impression of their mother’s death
was yet green, and to lose me, was to become orphans a second time.
But I had fully meditated my plan, and was peremptory. That I might
withhold from them no advantage it was in my power to confer, I gave
them Bernardin for their superintending bailiff and steward of their
property. Our parting was not less painful and melancholy, than its
occasion was extraordinary and its mode uncommon. It took place at the
town of Montauban.

I saw my dear children set forward on their journey, and I knew not
that I should ever behold them more. I was determined never again
to see them to their injury; and I could not take to myself the
consolation,--on such a day, in such a month, or even after such
a lapse of years, I will again have the joy to embrace them. In a
little while they were out of sight, and I was alone. The reader will
perhaps agree with me, that no man had more exquisitely enjoyed the
dearest ties of society than I had, and that perhaps few men were ever
better formed to enjoy them. This complete and dreadful separation,
this stroke that seemed to cut me off abruptly from every thing most
valuable that the earth contains, was not the result of any of the
ordinary necessities of human life. Still less was it the dictate of
alienation or indifference. No; it was the pure effect of love, of a
love so strong, complete, and uncontrollable, as inflexibly to refuse
every thing that could be injurious to its objects. I own I could not
thus have parted with Marguerite. Her idea was mingled with the vital
springs of my existence; and scarcely any power less resistless than
death could have made me consent to pass an entire day without her
society. But then it is to be considered, that my daughters were in
the morning of life; their hopes were untarnished, their prospects not
obscured by a single cloud; and that the crime would probably have been
greater, obstinately to have made them the partners of my misfortunes
and disgrace. There are persons who will regard this passage in my
history as culpable, and the testimony of a cold and unsusceptible
heart. I contemplate it, even at this distance of time, as the noblest
and most virtuous effort of my life; and a thousand circumstances have
occurred since, to induce me to congratulate myself that I had the
courage to achieve my purpose.




CHAPTER XXIX.


Nineteen years had now elapsed from the day that had witnessed my union
with Marguerite de Damville. In all that time I had never been alone.
Alone in a certain sense indeed I had stood at Paris in the period
that had led to my exile, and at Soleure in that which immediately
succeeded it. In each case I was solitary, and my solitude was unhappy.
But my unhappiness was then in a certain sense spontaneous; my solitude
was a luxury in which I felt myself impelled to indulge. He that has
experienced both, will readily acknowledge the extreme difference
between the misery we embrace and the misery from which we shrink
with abhorrence and loathing. I relinquished in the former instances
my dearest connections, my proper post and situation; but I felt that
I could return to the one and resume the other at pleasure. I repeat
it therefore, Then I had not been alone, and now I was alone. The
same motive, which in this instance made me cut myself off from my
daughters that I might not be the cause of their misery, forbad me to
be the parent of a future offspring upon whom I might entail similar
misfortune. Tell me then, was I not alone? I recollected the words
of the stranger, wrung from him by the excess of his misery at the
summer-house of the lake, “Alone--alone!--friendless--friendless!” I
began to penetrate the enigma of his history.

I fixed my daughters with an ample revenue in the château of St.
Leon; I re-purchased for them all my paternal property. I waited some
time at Montauban to hear of the event of my project, and their final
settlement. I learned with pleasure that they found their situation
peaceful, easy, and reputable; I enjoined them that they should speak
and think of me as dead. I led them to suppose, when I left Montauban,
that I should set out upon an extensive tour, that I should traverse
the Indus and the Ganges, and penetrate into the furthest extremities
of the East. How uncommon, how pitiable a fate! I became prematurely
dead to my country and my race, because I was destined never to die!
The first sensation I derived from their prosperity, as I have already
said, was pleasure: my second was that which the devil might have felt,
when he entered paradise for the seduction of our first parents. I
contemplated with some degree of malignant envy a happiness of which
it was little probable I should ever partake. Let me not be censured
for this: let any man put himself in my situation, and say, whether the
pleasure he feels at contemplating the separated happiness of those he
loves be not a mingled sensation? With heavy heart I sought again the
road of Madrid.

Though my spirits underwent an extreme depression, I determined not
to desert myself or the advantages I had purchased at so inestimable
a price. I exerted myself to shake off my lethargy, and rouse the
faculties of my soul. I refused to give way to omens of evil portent,
and resolved to see what might yet be made of my endowments. There
is no misfortune that has not in it some slight mixture of good. My
being now alone, and detached from every relative tie, left me at
liberty to pursue my projects with a bolder enterprise. The mistake
of which I accused myself in the former instance, was the entering
too precipitately into the exercise of the gifts of the stranger,
before I had properly measured my strength, and investigated the
use and application of my tools. I had suffered sufficiently from
the past uncertainty and irresoluteness of my march. I determined,
as far as human precaution could secure its ends, to encounter no
more misfortunes, to subject myself to no further miscarriages, but
to take care that henceforth the tide of my pursuits should move
smoothly onward. I dedicated the six months immediately succeeding my
separation from my daughters, to the joint contemplation of morals and
natural philosophy. I was resolved to ascertain the simplest mode of
manufacturing wealth, the wisest methods for lulling the suspicions and
controlling the passions of mankind, and the true science of the use
of riches. Alas! I had in the sequel frequent occasions to confess,
that, though I had fortuitously entered into possession of the leading
secrets of natural magic, I was a mere tyro in the science of man, at
least in the degree in which the exercise of these secrets required the
possession of it.

Nothing material occurred to interrupt the occupations of the winter.
My apathy--intellectual activity, palsy of the heart,--went evenly
forward. I made no acquaintance; I was a mere spectator of the busy
scenes that passed around me. I was resolved not to entangle myself
with rashly formed connections; and it will commonly be found, that
he, whose contemplations are principally employed upon some secret and
guarded hoard of reflection, has little propensity to communicate upon
idle and indifferent matters.

A slight incident indeed disturbed me for a few days during this
interval; but it passed away, and for the present I thought of it no
more. During the festival of Christmas it happened that I felt an
inclination to be the spectator of a celebrated bull-fight, that was
exhibited before the emperor and his court. For the most part I was
studious of privacy; I therefore felt the less scruple in indulging
this unusual caprice. At the commencement of the spectacle, I was
attentive only to the exhibition. I was delighted with the form and
beauty of the animals, with the freedom and grandeur of their motion,
with the terrible energy of their assault and repulse. It was not
long, however, before my eye was transiently caught by an individual,
who sat in a gallery at no great distance, and who seemed to view me
attentively. His figure bespoke some degree of refinement; but his eye
was fiery, malicious, and savage. Presently however I turned again
towards the area, and thought of him no more. Some time after by mere
accident I looked towards the same gallery, and observed this man still
in an attitude to examine me. It seemed as if he had not removed his
eyes from me during the whole interval. This was repeated three or
four times. Without knowing why, I became anxious and uneasy. I had a
confused feeling that I had seen the man before, but whether in France,
Switzerland, or Italy, I could not tell. I experienced that sort of
disagreeable sensation from looking at his face, which arises in the
mind from an association of the object present, with some mischief or
suffering that was contemporary with its being perceived in a preceding
instance. I am now persuaded that this man was one of the multitude to
whom I had addressed myself from the bench on the hill a short time
before my flight from Pisa, and that he was among the most eager to
interrupt and molest me. But he was apparently a Spaniard by birth,
and I could not at this time develope the mystery that hung about his
features. Finding that I could neither rid myself of his curious and
watchful observation, nor of the disturbance it gave me, I withdrew
from the gallery where I had hitherto been sitting, and removed to
another gallery on the opposite side of the area. About half an hour
after, looking accidentally round, I saw this very man at my elbow. I
then accosted him with the enquiry, “Do you know me, sir?” to which he
immediately returned, with a pure Castilian accent, “_No, señor!_” He
then began to be more reserved in his attention to me, without however
entirely withdrawing it.

As soon as the entertainment was over, I went away, and saw no more
of my Spaniard. I began to tax myself with pusillanimity in suffering
so insignificant an incident to disturb me. A few days after however
I suddenly lighted upon him in the street. He was talking to three or
four of his countrymen, and in the progress of his discourse frequently
pointed to me. I could now perceive something particularly hostile
and ferocious in his countenance. The first impulse I felt was,
that I would no longer suffer the unquietness and anxiety the sight
of him produced in me, but would go up to him, and force him to an
explanation. I believed however that, in the temper he indicated, this
could not be done without involving myself in a quarrel; and I thought
it wiser to endeavour to conquer in silence an unreasonable sensation.
I therefore passed on; he immediately broke from his company, and
attempted to follow me. This I determined not to endure. I laid my
hand on my sword with a peremptory look, and waved to him to desist.
His countenance then assumed an air of diabolical malignity, he shook
his head furiously, and turned down another street. A strange sort of
animosity this, between two persons utter strangers to each other,
and which had as yet not deigned to express itself by a word! But
such is the world! We hate we know not why. We are ready to cut each
other’s throats, because we do not like the turn of a feature, or the
adjustment of a sword-knot. Prejudice, party, difference of countries,
difference of religions, and a thousand wild chimeras of fanaticism or
superstition, are continually arming us against a man, of whose virtues
and qualities we are ignorant, and into whose benevolent or evil
intentions we disdain to enquire.

I saw this Spaniard but once more. It was as I was on the point of
entering the house, a part of which I occupied. I was particularly
mortified at this circumstance. It was plain the man entertained, for
whatever reason, a determined animosity against me; and I was grieved
to furnish him with that advantage for injuring me, which consisted in
being acquainted with the place of my residence. I would have turned
away and gone down the street; but I had too fully marked my design of
entering the house, before I reconnoitered my enemy. The displeasure I
felt was so unaccountably great, that it was with difficulty my courage
got the better of it; and I determined not to change the place of my
abode. In a short time however, as I have already said, I thought of
this incident no more. That it should have disturbed and unhinged
me, in the degree that it had done, even for a moment, was a thing I
could not account for. Had the calamities in which the legacy of the
stranger involved me, converted me in so short a time, from a knight
and a soldier, into a character of that morbid timidity, as to tremble
at every shadow? Or, is there in some human countenances a fascination,
a sort of mysterious sympathy and presentiment, that makes us cower and
quail whenever we meet their eye-beams?

Several weeks now passed away, and I had nearly forgotten all the
circumstances of this seemingly foolish story, when, in a little
excursion I chanced to make from Madrid to a place about twelve miles
distant, I was overtaken upon the road by a cavalier of respectable
appearance, who presently took occasion to enter into conversation
with me. He explained to me several of the objects that presented
themselves on either side, told the names of the different nobility and
grandees who occupied the villas we saw, and sometimes entered into the
particulars of their history. I at first gave little encouragement to
this communicative traveller; but there was something so polite in his
manner, and intelligent in his discourse, that I could not prevail upon
myself to treat him with rudeness or disrespect. After having talked
for some time upon indifferent topics, he led to the general state of
literature in Europe. Few subjects could appear less dangerous than
this, as there were few upon which I felt myself better qualified to
converse. By degrees I threw off some of my original reserve, and I
found my companion well informed and ingenious, lively in his manner,
and pertinent in his remarks.

By this time the unknown, having discovered that I had only come from
Madrid for a day’s relaxation, invited himself to dine with me at my
inn. I departed from my established system of conduct on this occasion,
and admitted his overture. After dinner he gave me some account
of himself and his family, and seemed to expect from me a similar
explicitness. I was less pleased with him in this particular, than
I had been with his frank and undesigning conversation on the road.
Strictly speaking however the expectation implied was only a breach
of politeness; I had no reason to suppose that he foresaw it to be
particularly offensive to me. Observing my backwardness, he immediately
changed the subject. Presently he remarked, that by my physiognomy
and accent he perceived I was a Frenchman, and asked me if I had known
Cornelius Agrippa, who died about twelve years before at Grenoble. I
answered in the negative. The unknown then entered into a warm eulogium
of the talents of Agrippa, inveighed against the illiberal treatment
he had experienced in consequence of his supposed proficiency in
magic, and spoke with great asperity of the priests and inquisitors
who had been his persecutors. I became attentive, watchful, and
suspicious. He went on to expatiate upon the praises of the art magic,
which nothing, he said, but the jealousy of churchmen had brought
into disrepute; affirmed that it had been treated with respect, and
counted illustrious, by the ancients, in the instance of Pythagoras,
Apollonius Tyaneus, and others; and expressed a great desire to become
a student of the art himself. This kind of discourse made me repent
that I had been drawn in so far as to sit down with this unknown, and
admit him as my companion of the day. During the whole time he was
the principal speaker. Sometimes he paused, with a seeming desire to
hear my sentiments. But I had now formed my resolution, and gave him
no encouragement. Presently after I called for my horse. I should have
observed, that his servant who followed him engaged in conversation
with mine, at the same time that the dialogue began between their
masters. Seeing me about to depart, the unknown motioned as if to
accompany me. Upon this I became serious.

“_Señor caballero_,” said I, “I have now had the pleasure of your
company to dinner: I am going home, and have the honour to bid you
farewell. It is neither my disposition, nor the habit of the grave and
dignified nation among whom I at present reside, to form permanent
acquaintances upon casual rencounters: you will not therefore think I
violate the hospitality for which I am indebted to them, if I intimate
to you my desire to return alone.”

All this I said with the grave and formal tone becoming a Spaniard,
and the unknown had nothing to reply. It was evident however that
my dryness chagrined him; and he even muttered words of resentment
between his teeth. I could observe now a degree of hostility and fury
in his countenance, which remarkably contrasted with the pliancy and
obligingness of his preceding demeanour. I took no notice however
of these circumstances, and rode away. I have since had sufficient
reasons to convince me that these two persons, whose story, but for
that explanation, may appear to the reader exceedingly frivolous, were
the one an informer, and the other a spy of the holy inquisition.
The man who had seen me at Pisa had his imagination terrified and
his superstition set in arms by all that he had heard of me in that
place; and thought he could not perform a more meritorious work, than
by giving intelligence to the fathers what sort of person had taken
refuge in the metropolis of this most Catholic kingdom. It was with
this view he had watched me, and at length, by an accident he deemed
peculiarly fortunate, lodged me in my proper habitation. Having given
in his denunciation, my travelling companion was next fastened on me by
the contrivance and zeal of the fathers inquisitors. He was a familiar
of the holy office; and it is well known that persons of the fairest
prospects and most polite education in Spain are led by their religious
impressions to place a pride in performing menial and even perfidious
offices in the service of the inquisition. The kind of dishonour I put
upon him in parting, though of a nature he could not openly resent,
I fear conspired with his zeal for God’s and the church’s honour,
to induce him to relate a story concerning me, more modelled by the
bitterness of his personal feelings, than distinguished by a regard to
truth.

Such was the snare, woven and drawing close round me on all sides for
my destruction. I was made uneasy by the rencounter of the traveller,
but by no means aware of the whole extent of the mischief that impended
over me. When I came to retrace, point by point, the discourse he had
held, I could not conceive that the turn it had taken originated in
accident. I perceived, with no little grief of heart and concern, that
I was known. It was however necessary that I should reflect maturely
upon the conduct to be pursued by me. I ought not gratuitously to
expose myself to danger. But then, on the other hand, it is a point of
general wisdom, and was particularly incumbent in my extraordinary
circumstances, not to suffer vigilance to degenerate into restless
anxiety. It would be easy for me, if I were not strictly on my guard,
continually to find food for suspicion, and to surround myself with
imaginary plots and dangers. This was a vice that I was willing enough
to pity in others; but there was no character that I more cordially
disdained for myself. There was none more pointedly in opposition to
that gallant, generous, confiding spirit, which had distinguished
those military heroes of my native soil, who had been the exclusive
object of my earliest admiration, and whom, in my present dejected
and deserted situation, I still desired to resemble. When I came to
reflect, I easily perceived that this vice was particularly allied to a
life of solitude; and that he who is cut off from the genuine and happy
connections of husband, father, and friend, is of all men most liable,
in their absence, to conjure up for himself the unnatural intercourses
and reciprocations of hostility. It was thus that I artificially
reconciled myself to my situation, and obstinately closed my eyes upon
those equivocal demonstrations of danger which from time to time were
presented to my view.




CHAPTER XXX.


Such was the state of my mind, when it happened, one gloomy evening in
the latter end of March, that my valet announced to me three gentlemen
who were come to visit me. It was strange: I had no visitors; I
indulged no relaxation but that of the street, and of public places.
Do you know who they are? said I. I accidentally looked up, and saw
paleness and terror written in his countenance. He had not however time
to reply, before they burst into the room. They were alguazils of the
inquisition. They told me their errand was to conduct me to the holy
office.

I submitted, and accompanied them. It was already dark. They put me
into a litter with the curtains drawn, and then arranged themselves
in silence, one on each side, while one brought up the rear. I was
taken by surprise: nothing could be further from my expectation than
such an event. As we passed along, I ruminated with myself on the line
of conduct it was incumbent on me to pursue. To make an immediate
experiment of the fidelity of my guides was a doubtful attempt. If, for
want of time and the opportunity of a tranquil hearing, I miscarried
with them, the trial would be converted into evidence against me. If I
succeeded, I had then to escape out of Spain, in the centre of which I
now was, from the hostility of a tribunal, which was said to surpass
all the tribunals on the face of the earth in activity and vigilance. I
knew of nothing that the fathers of the inquisition could have against
me. I had lived in the most entire seclusion; and I could defy any one
to report a single action of mine, since I had entered Spain, to my
prejudice. I had been wholly occupied with melancholy reflections on
the past, and solitary inventions and devices which I purposed to bring
forward for the future. I determined not to live for ever the slave of
fear. I believed that the best method for defeating a danger, in many
cases, was undauntedly to encounter it; and I did not imagine that I
could have a more favourable opportunity for that purpose than the
present. I had heard much indeed of the terrors of the inquisition; but
a generous and liberal spirit lends no very attentive ear to horrors,
the trite and vulgar rumour of which only has reached him. I disdained
to be blown down with a breath. I believed that the inquisition itself
would not venture to proceed criminally against a man against whom
nothing criminal had been alleged. In every event, I believed it would
never be too late to have recourse to my peculiar prerogatives.

Upon entering the prison of the inquisition I was first conducted to
a solitary cell. It is not my intention to treat of those particulars
of the holy office which are already to be found in innumerable
publications. I have no pleasure in reviving the images of this sojourn
of horrors. I know it is unreasonable to despise a man for the miseries
and wretchedness he has endured; but I know that such is the human
heart, and I will not expose myself to be scoffed at and trampled upon
for my misfortunes. I found myself under the necessity, while in the
inquisition, of submitting to that most profligate of all impositions,
an oath of secrecy as to what I had seen, and what I had suffered; and,
whatever may be the strict morality of such an obligation, I will not
ambitiously thrust myself forward in violation of it. I will restrict
the story I have to relate to the peculiarities that characterised my
case, and enter as little as possible into the general policy of this
frontier intrenchment of the Christian faith.

When I was brought up to be interrogated, I was assailed with
innumerable questions, the obvious purport of which was, as much as
possible, to extort from me evidence of every kind that might be
injurious to my cause. The object of the inquisition is to defend
our holy mother, the church, from whatever might defile her sanctity
and whiteness. Every thing that calls into question the truth of
her doctrines, that pollutes and turns from their original purpose
any of her ordinances, or that implies commerce and league with the
invisible enemy of saints, it is its peculiar province to investigate.
The fathers are therefore particularly cautious that they may not,
by confining their questions too much to a single object, preclude
themselves from the chance of discovering danger under all the forms
it may assume. It is presumed that he who is a corrupt member of the
church of Christ in one point is unsound and unfaithful in others.

The inquisitor who examined me, first demanded, whether I were informed
for what cause I was brought before that tribunal? Whether I did not
find myself able to conjecture the nature of my offence? Whether I did
not know the sort of crimes for which men were detained in that prison?
He then desired me to recollect myself, and consider, whether I were
not conscious of offence against the holy Catholic church? Whether I
had never asserted or maintained any doctrines contrary to what mother
church asserts and maintains? Whether I had never, to my knowledge,
defiled any of the ordinances of God, or applied things sacred to
unholy and profane purposes? Whether I had never invocated the devil?
Whether I had never held any commerce, or entered into any league,
with the enemy of saints? Whether I had never performed, or sought to
perform, preternatural and miraculous acts by unholy means? Whether I
had never vexed, or sought to vex, those against whom I had enmity, by
secret and forbidden arts? Whether I had never resided in countries the
inhabitants of which were heretics, and whether I had never listened
to their discourses and arguments? Whether, when I inhabited such
countries, I had never assisted at the celebration of divine ordinances
performed by heretics, or in a form which holy church disapproves or
condemns?

Finding that he could gain nothing upon me by these general
interrogatories, the inquisitor next descended to particulars. He
enquired concerning the incidents of my Pisan story, which, having
first assured myself from the train of his questions that some
representation of that unfortunate affair had reached his ear, I
willingly related, to the same extent that I had previously done to the
marchese Filosanto.

He then proceeded to a great number of questions, the source of which
is to be traced to the commonly received notions respecting sorcerers
and necromancers. They were so artfully contrived, and so large in
their scope, that it was not easy to guess whether they related to
any particular accusation alleged against me, or were formed entirely
on general principles. Yet some of them were so minute, so connected,
and arranged so perfectly in series, that I could not but believe they
were an echo of the calumnies invented against me at Pisa, of which,
however, as I had never collected any regular and detailed account, I
could not accurately trace the influence on the present occasion.

The inquisitor demanded of me, Whether I had never seen or held
conversation with any supernatural being, or the spirit of a man
departed? Whether I had never practised diabolical arts to raise the
dead? Whether I had never had a familiar in the form of some insect,
domestic animal, or reptile? He was particularly subtle and copious
in his questions respecting the history of my unfortunate dog,
endeavouring to surprise me in some slip or contradiction in what I
affirmed on the subject. He asked, Whether I had never assumed a form
different from my real one, either a different age and appearance, or
a different species of animal? Whether I had never, by the agency of
my demon, inflicted sickness, convulsion-fits, or death? Whether I
had never caused the mortality of cattle? Whether I had not the power
of being in two places at once? Whether I had never been seen riding
through the air? Whether I had never been wounded in my absence, by
a blow aimed at my astral spirit or apparition? Whether I had never
possessed books of conjuration or the art magic? Whether it had never
happened to me that an indifferent person, indiscreetly perusing a
spell or incantation in my possession, had been maimed or killed by the
spirits he had undesignedly evoked?

A further object particularly pursued in my interrogatory, was the
detection of my property; and the questions constructed for this
purpose were uncommonly artful and multiplied. The inquisitor told
me that the holy office was, by the nature of its institution, the
guardian and administrator of every person that fell under its
animadversion. Shut up, he said, as I must be, during the pendency
of my cause, and separated from the rest of mankind, I was wholly
incapable of superintending my worldly affairs, which, unless they
were properly looked into, might in the interval be materially
injured. I ought therefore implicitly and without reserve to refer
myself in this point to the care of the fathers. If my innocence were
established, as he hoped, and earnestly prayed to the mother of God,
and the saints of Jesus, might ultimately happen, I should find the
holy office a faithful and qualified steward. If, on the contrary,
I should be proved a heretic and an alien to the Most High, I ought
then to rejoice in the beneficent interference of the fathers, who, by
dedicating my wealth to consecrated purposes, would mitigate in the eye
of the just Judge of heaven and earth the duration or fierceness of
my punishments in a future world. The inquisitor had apparently heard
various reports of my riches, and was inexpressibly chagrined that he
should be found so unskilful a member of his profession, as not to be
able to extort from me a full confession on that head. After having
employed every artifice of menace and terror, after having endeavoured
to soothe and cajole me by blandishments and persuasion, and finding
all his expedients fruitless, he poured upon me the full storm of his
indignation. He said, it was apparent that I was dealing disingenuously
and fraudulently with the delegated guardians of religion; it was
impossible that the expenditure I was well known more or less to have
incurred could be supported without considerable funds; and my evident
duplicity and concealment in this point must be regarded as a full
confirmation of every crime my accusers had alleged against me.

In the course of my examinations, the inquisitor who questioned me
gave himself the trouble of entering into a full vindication of the
tribunal of which he was a member. He said, that every thing that
was valuable to mankind, not only in a future state, but also in the
present, depended upon preserving in full vigour and strength the
sacred institutions of the Christian faith; and that those who were
endowed with powers sufficient for that purpose would be in the highest
degree inexcusable in the sight of God, if they did not vigilantly and
inflexibly maintain the exertion of those powers. It was an egregious
mistake of self-willed and opinionated men, to suppose that the
maintenance of our holy religion was sufficiently provided for by the
clearness of its evidence. It was no less dangerous, to pretend that
the stability and duration of the church of Christ might be confided
to the providence of God. Providence acts by human means; and it was
presumptuous for those who neglected the means to trust that they
should nevertheless see the end adequately secured. Why had Providence
thought proper to generate an alliance between church and state, and
to place the powers and authority of human society in the hands of the
adherents of the Christian faith? Magistrates and governments were
thus made the vicars of Heaven, and great would be their condemnation
if they neglected the trust reposed in them. The great adversary of
mankind was incessantly watchful for the destruction of souls; and,
while he spread abroad his delusions, it was folly to imagine that
evidence alone was powerful enough to counteract them. What judges were
the great mass of mankind of the integrity and validity of evidence?
The jest of the scorner was ever at hand to turn into ridicule the most
sacred mysteries. The opposers of our holy faith were indefatigable
in their industry, and as anxious in their exertions to deprive their
fellow-men of every comfort and hope, as if infidelity, which was the
curse of the human species, were the greatest blessing that could
be conferred on them. The devil was a hard task-master, and granted
no vacation, night or day, to those who enlisted themselves in the
support of his cause. It might answer well enough the purpose of the
vain-glorious theorist, to suppose that man was a rational animal;
but they who had regarded human society with an observing eye knew
that it was otherwise. Delusion would ever be too hard for evidence,
and the grossest falsehoods prove victorious over the most sacred
truths, if what was illiberally and maliciously styled persecution
were not brought in aid of the cause of religion. The passions of
mankind were on the side of falsehood; man, unrestrained by law, was a
wild, ferocious, and most pernicious beast, and, were it not for the
wholesome curb of authority, would speedily throw off all ties and
limitations, human and divine. Nothing could more clearly prove, that
the heretical followers of Luther and Calvin, who had lately sprung up
for the plague of mankind, whatever they might pretend, were in reality
the determined enemies of all revelation, than their continual demand,
that the cause should be tried by discussion, and that every man should
be defended in the exercise of his private judgment. They could not but
know,--every man not totally robbed of all power of discernment must
know,--that, if this demand were once granted, it would prove a blow
at the root of every sentiment of religion. The inquisition therefore
was the most salutary institution that had ever been devised; and the
future welfare of mankind wholly depended upon the maintenance of
its powers and its maxims. By a moderate and judicious exhibition of
terror, it superseded the necessity of innumerable punishments. The
inquisition was not capricious and uncertain in its policy; it acted
under the direction of immutable laws; it held a tender, but a firm
rein upon the extravagances and madness of mankind. Nothing was more
notorious, than that a regular and systematical proceeding was both
more effectual and more generous than one that was fickle. He defied
the whole history of the world to produce an example of so merciful a
tribunal. The great end of its policy was the reclaiming of sinners
and the multiplication of penitents, who, after a gentle and salutary
discipline, were again by holy church received into her bosom; and
even when they delivered the finally impenitent to the flames, it
was to the flames of a purifying fire, which by destroying the flesh
redeemed or diminished the punishments of a future world. He knew that
an outcry had been artfully raised against the proceedings of the holy
office. But it was easy to see that its enemies, under the pretence
of compassion for its victims, concealed an inveterate animosity
against property, religion, and civil society. The anabaptists had
thrown off the mask, and discovered their true designs; and the rest
were only more plausible and specious, in proportion as they were
more timid. The present was the most important crisis that ever
occurred in the history of the world. There was a spirit at work, that
aimed at dissolving all the bonds of civil society, and converting
mankind into beasts and savages. Who had not heard of the levellers,
millenarians, and fifth-monarchy-men, who, under the specious guise of
disinterestedness and an universal love of mankind, had nothing in view
but the most sacrilegious and unprincipled depredations? It was true
that the preachers of these doctrines were utterly contemptible both
for numbers and talent: but it would be found a short-sighted policy,
to overlook these desperate assailants on account of the poorness and
meanness of their qualifications. For his own part he did not hesitate
to say, that human society would owe its preservation, if it were
preserved, to the merciful yet vigorous proceedings of the court of
inquisition. The misrepresentations that were invidiously made of the
present firm and vigilant system of policy would be heard for a day,
and then universally abandoned. Posterity, he was well assured, would
do full justice to the sagacity and soundness of the conduct of this
calumniated and much injured institution.

The reader will forgive me if the panegyric thus elaborately pronounced
by the inquisitor who examined me, upon the court of which he was a
member, had not all the weight with my mind at the moment I heard it
which he will probably ascribe to it in the calmness of the closet.
It is so difficult to be impartial in our own cause! The candid mind
will no doubt make a large allowance for the unhappy situation in which
I now stood, and the bitter and galling thoughts that preyed upon
my memory. But, if I am chargeable with temporary injustice in the
judgment I then passed on the arguments of the inquisitor, I flatter
myself that I have been able, after the interval that has elapsed, to
give a true and adequate statement of them.

Beside these reasonings on the necessity of a wholesome restraint on
the privileges of speaking and writing, the father in another of my
examinations condescended to delineate to me the mysteries of the world
of spirits. He reminded me that in the first grand rebellion upon
record, that of the fallen angels, of which he considered the present
defection under Luther and Calvin as in some measure a counterpart,
a third of the host of heaven had been thrust out of the celestial
mansions. These accursed spirits had since been permitted to pursue
their machinations on the face of our earth. “The devil, like a roaring
lion, goeth about, seeking whom he may devour.” The oracles of the
heathens, the temptations of Job and of our Saviour, and the demoniacs
of sacred writ, were examples of the extensive power which Heaven had
thought fit to allow him. Men of a sceptical and feeble understanding
had been tempted to doubt whether this was consistent with the wisdom
and goodness of God. But, though it was in vain for us to pretend to
fathom the depth of the divine mysteries, there were certain reasons
that were sufficiently obvious to every ingenuous mind. There were
persons in all ages of the world, who, like the Sadducees in the
time of our blessed Saviour, were inclined to affirm “that there was
no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit;” and God permitted the
lying wonders of infernal agents the more completely to confound the
unbelief of his enemies. He who witnessed the wonderful operations of
witchcraft, or saw the ghost of a man departed, could not doubt of
the interference of invisible agents in the concerns of our nether
world; and, if there were devils and apparitions, it would be to the
last degree unreasonable to deny the existence of God, or the miracles
of Christ. These were to be received as the grounds of the divine
permission of sorcerers, necromancers, and witches. But the rules of
the divine conduct were not to constitute the rules of ours. He might
permit the agency of invisible malice, because he saw things upon an
unlimited scale, his judgments were infallible, and he could say to
Beelzebub himself, “Thus far shalt thou go, and no further.” Those
to whose care was intrusted the welfare of mankind here or hereafter
were bound as far as possible to oppose themselves to the empire of
Satan. His power was given him only for a time, and, if not strictly
restrained of God and the powers ordained of God, it would over-run
every thing, and replunge all this beautiful scene of creation in its
original chaos. There was an endless and eternal war between God and
the devil, and the governors of the church were Heaven’s field-officers
and pioneers for carrying it on. Of all the crimes, he added, to which
the depravity of human nature had given birth, the most astonishing
and the most horrible was that of diabolical commerce. That human
creatures should be so far infatuated, as to enter into league with
the declared enemy of souls, and for the possession of a short-lived
and precarious power to sign away their spirits to eternal damnation,
was so extraordinary as to have been wholly unworthy of credit, were
it not supported by evidence as strong and irresistible as that of the
miracles of Jesus Christ himself. The persons who thus voluntarily made
themselves accursed before God deserved to be regarded with alienation
and horror by the whole human race. Every man that saw them was bound
by his baptismal engagements to destroy them; and whoever administered
to them the smallest portion of food, drink, or comfort, thereby
rendered himself a party to their guilt. The inquisition especially had
declared against this race of men eternal war, and considered their
crime as more complicated, audacious, and pestilential, than any other
branch of heresy. Having, for his own part, no doubt that I was one
of these noxious and enormous reprobates, he exhorted me to make a
voluntary confession of my evil deeds, and, by submitting readily to
the tortures and punishments of this world, endeavour to free myself,
if it were yet possible, from those of the world to come.

These discourses of the inquisitor were variously interspersed through
the three examinations to which I was subjected a short time after I
became an inhabitant of the holy house. On my part I endeavoured to the
best of my power to repel the imputations cast upon me, to establish my
innocence, and to confound the severity of my oppressors. I told the
inquisitor, whatever might be the force of his arguments respecting
heresy and dealings with the devil, they were nothing to me. I was no
Lutheran, no anabaptist, no necromancer, no underminer of the faith
of others, or ally of the prince of the infernal regions. I proudly
and earnestly demanded to be confronted with my accusers. I asked my
examiner in his turn, What sort of justice that was, which pretended
to proceed capitally against its prisoners upon secret and unavowed
accusations? He endeavoured to stop me. He told me that I was not
brought there to arraign the methods and practices of their court;
that it did not become a prisoner put upon his defence to insult his
judges; that this contumacy could not be regarded but as an aggravation
of my guilt; and that I was bound strictly and simply to answer the
interrogatories that were proposed to me. The rebuke of the inquisitor
was unavailing. My spirit was wrought to too high a pitch to be thus
restrained; I was too firmly resolved to give the utmost force of mind
and truth to the topics of my just defence. It is the practice of the
inquisition for the prisoner to sit during his examination. I started
upon my feet.

“The mode of your proceeding,” cried I, “is the mockery of a trial.
From your fatal bar no man can go forth acquitted. How is a story to be
refuted, when hardly and with difficulty you suffer your prisoner to
collect the slightest fragments of it? If I would detect a calumny, is
it not requisite that I should be acquainted with its history, and know
its authors and propagators? Then I may perhaps be able to confound
their forgeries, to show the groundlessness of their allegations, to
expose the baseness of their purposes and the profligacy of their
characters. I am informed of nothing; yet I am bid, first to be my
own accuser, and then to answer the accusations of others. It is only
by following a falsehood through all its doublings that it can be
effectually destroyed. You bid me unravel a web, and will not suffer me
to touch it with one of my fingers. The defence of the purest innocence
is often difficult, sometimes impossible, against the artfulness
of a malicious tale, or the fortuitous concurrence of unfavourable
appearances. But you strip innocence of those consecrated weapons by
which only it can be defended. Give to an accusation the particulars
with which what really happens must always be attended, give to it
the circumstances of place and of time, lay aside the ambiguity and
generalities in which you shelter yourselves, and then, perhaps then
only, it can be victoriously repelled. You ask me a thousand various
and artfully constructed questions. What sort of a man do you imagine
me to be? I am not a fool, that I should be inveigled; I am not a
boy, that I should be menaced into confessions. Cease your base
and unprincipled arts! I will furnish no materials against myself.
If you know anything against me, avow it! Propose it, and I will
answer. Think not to patch up a miserable accusation out of the words
which inadvertence or weariness may cause me to utter. Shame on your
institution! May infamy overtake the system of your proceedings! That
religion which is supported by such means is viler than atheism. That
civilisation which has its basis in despotism, is more worthless and
hateful than the state of savages running wild in their woods.

“Do you not perceive that the language I am now holding to you is the
exclusive privilege of conscious innocence? The indignation I express
is no artificial rage, studiously contrived to overbear accusation.
You have it, as it flows spontaneously to my tongue, warm from the
promptings of an honest heart. If I could have consulted a friend, it
is probable he would have dissuaded me from my present demeanour as
impolitic. If I were governed by the dictates of an ordinary prudence,
I should have displayed less ardour, less resentment. But I am willing
to try whether shame cannot yet be lighted up even in the cheek of an
inquisitor.”

The father who examined me, having in vain endeavoured to check the
current of my invective, changed his manner, and assumed a tone
diametrically the reverse of mine. He professed that he felt much
compassion and interest for my misfortune, and should deem himself
happy if he could be the instrument of my deliverance. The language
I had uttered was highly indecorous, and such as seemed in itself to
call for a rigorous penance. But he should not think himself worthy the
name of a man, if he did not make suitable allowance for the bitter and
extravagant sentiments, that would occasionally find their way into
the mind of one in my unfortunate situation. So circumstanced, men
would often mistake their friends for their enemies. I regarded the
inquisition as my enemy: it was in reality my firm and disinterested
friend; zealously watchful for my body, my soul, and my estate. Other
courts had other maxims of proceeding, because their motives of action
were different; and it was but just that they should furnish their
prisoners with a defence against their frailty. But the breast of an
inquisitor was accessible to no sentiment but that of love; a burning
love of God; love of the church; love of the prisoner, who might be
wrongfully accused; love of the penitent, whom he reconciled to our
common mother, the church; love even of the incorrigible heretic
whose body he burned for the good of his soul. The inquisitor did
not discover to the prisoner the evidence adduced against him; that
was between God and the inquisitor’s conscience. But the suppression
which was thus practised rendered him doubly scrupulous and sceptical
as to the evidence he received; he sifted it with a severity that the
prisoner would in vain endeavour to imitate; and the rules of evidence
in that court were so guarded, punctilious, and minute, as to render
any mistake in its proceedings altogether impossible. For a man to be
once a prisoner of the court of inquisition, by a salutary prejudice
which prevailed through the catholic world, rendered him for ever
infamous. This was another cause of the extreme wariness and caution,
with which that court was accustomed to proceed. They first listened
to the accuser, who was obliged to give in his information on oath.
They then instituted a secret enquiry against the party accused; and,
till they had collected abundant ground for their proceeding, they did
not venture to touch a hair of his head. They elaborately classed all
the different degrees of evidence into half proof, full proof, proof
less than half, and proof less than full. When these things were duly
considered, it would appear certain that no court that had at any time
existed on earth, had ever been so tender in its proceedings, so pure
in its incitements, and so every way superior to the attacks of calumny
and malice, as the court of inquisition.

With respect to myself in particular, he said, they had not apprehended
me and put me upon my defence, without previously assembling a large
body of miscellaneous and circumstantial evidence. The evidence
they had drawn from myself was negative only, but it was strong:
the obscurity that hung about my person, who I was, and whence I
came; and the obscurity that hung about my fortune, a great visible
expenditure in Spain or in Italy, and no visible means. These were
not the signatures and tokens of innocence. They tended strongly to
confirm the accusation under which I laboured. Yet so tender was the
inquisition in its proceeding, and so chary of its reputation, that
upon these accumulated proofs and presumptions, they were not prepared
to pronounce against me. They would hear me again and again. They would
give me time to recollect myself, and for this purpose they would order
for me a coarse and scanty fare, and a solitary cell. I might depend
upon it my contumacy should be overcome. The fundamental principle of
their proceedings was borrowed from that humane and compassionate maxim
of the old Roman law, _De vita hominis nulla cunctatio est longa_;
and I should accordingly find them free from all precipitation and
impatience, and ready to indulge me with a residence, however long, in
their prisons, till my case had been sifted to the bottom.




CHAPTER XXXI.


The indulgence thus ostentatiously proclaimed by the father-inquisitor
was not exactly to my taste. Finding that all the energy of mind I
could apply to my defence was vain, I determined to have recourse to
a different mode of proceeding. I received three admonitions, as they
call them, the substance of which I have already recited, in the course
of the first ten days of my confinement, and I then for some time
heard of the inquisitor no more. I understood that it was frequently
the practice, after three admonitions, not to bring up the prisoner
for further hearing during a whole year; and it appeared sufficiently
probable from the last words addressed to me by my judge, that this
policy was intended to be employed in my case. Without further delay
therefore I resolved to recur to the expedient in the use of which my
power was unbounded, and by a brilliant offer at once to subdue the
scruples, and secure the fidelity, of the person or persons upon whom
my safe custody might be found to depend. All that was necessary was to
convince the party to whom I should propose the assisting me, of the
reality of my powers; and then to put _carte blanche_ into his hands,
or rather to ascertain at once the extent of his hopes and demands, and
by a spirited and peremptory conduct to yield them all. In the period
which, immediately previous to my present imprisonment, I had devoted
to the meditation of my future plans and the review of my past, I had
severely accused myself of half measures, and had determined to abjure
all hesitation and irresoluteness for the time to come. It is not
indeed to be wondered at, that, possessing a power so utterly remote
from common ideas and conceptions, and which, speaking from experience,
I do not hesitate to affirm no mere effort of imagination is adequate
to represent, I should have acted below the prerogatives and demands
of my situation. This mistake I would make no more. I would overwhelm
opposition by the splendour of my proceedings, and confound scruples by
the dignity and princely magnificence of my appearance. Unshackled as
I was with connections, and risking no one’s happiness but my own, I
proposed to compel the human species to view me from an awful distance,
and to oblige every one that approached me to feel his inferiority. It
would be to the last degree disgraceful and contemptible in me, being
raised so far above my peers in my privileges, if I were to fall below
the ordinary standard of a gallant man in the decision and firmness of
my system of conduct. Decision and firmness were the principles to be
exercised by me now; dignity and magnificence must await their turn
hereafter.

It was not long before I embraced an opportunity of speaking to the
man who waited on me with my daily allotment of provisions, and I
designed as shortly as possible to proceed to that species of argument,
in which I principally confided to engage him in my cause. But he
did not suffer me to utter a sentence before with a very expressive
gesture he interrupted me. I had remarked already the silence which
seemed for ever to pervade this dismal abode; but I had not ascribed
importance enough to this circumstance, to suppose that it could
materially interfere with the project I had formed. I now perceived the
countenance of my attendant to be overspread with terror and alarm. He
put his hand upon my mouth, and by his attitude seemed earnestly to
insist upon my conforming to the rules of the prison. I was not however
to be thus diverted from my purpose. I seized his hands, and began
again to pursue the discourse I had meditated. This proceeding on my
part induced him to break the silence he had hitherto preserved. He
told me that if I did not instantly set him at liberty, he would alarm
the prison. I loosed his hands. I then by every gesture I could devise
endeavoured to prevail on him to approach me, to suffer me to confer
with him in the lowest whisper, and assured him that he should have no
reason to repent his compliance. I might as well have addressed myself
to the walls that inclosed me. He would not stay an instant; he would
yield in nothing. He burst from me abruptly, and, closing the door of
my cell, left me in solitude and darkness.

In the evening of the day of this attempt the keeper of the prison
entered my apartment. When he appeared, I began to flatter myself that
in this man I should find a better subject for my purpose than in
the poor turnkey who had given me so unfavourable a prognostic of my
success. I lost no time in saying to him that I had something important
to communicate; but he peremptorily commanded me to be silent, and
listen to what he was about to say to me. He told me that I had already
been complained against for speech, and I was now repeating my offence.
He advised me to ponder well the consequences of what I was doing. The
orders of the inquisition were rigorous and inflexible. The cells were
not so substantially separated but that a voice might be heard from one
to the other; yet it had happened more than once, that a husband and
wife, a father and child, had for years been lodged next to each other,
without the smallest suspicion on either part of the proximity of
their situation. He was astonished at the pertinacity of my behaviour.
There was no government on the face of the earth, he would venture to
say, that had subjects more obedient, more dutiful and exemplary than
the holy inquisition. Not a murmur was ever heard; not a discontent
ever expressed. All was humbleness, thankfulness, and gratitude. He
recommended to me to conform myself to my situation, and let him hear
no further complaints of me. He had no sooner finished his harangue,
than he left me as abruptly as his servant had done. It is not possible
to impart any adequate image of the inflexibility of his features, or
the stern composure of his demeanour.

I now saw my situation in a different point of view. Bribery was of no
use, where all intercourse was denied. Great God! into what position
was I got? In the midst of a great and populous city, at this time
perhaps the metropolis of the world, I heard occasionally from beyond
the limits of my prison the hum of busy throngs, or the shouts of a
tumultuous populace. Yet I was myself in the deepest solitude. Like
the wretched mariners I have somewhere read of, shipwrecked upon a
desert shore, I might remain encaged, till I lost all recollection
of European language, and all acquaintance with the sound of my
own voice. A jailor from time to time entered my apartment; but to
me he was simply a moving and breathing statue, his features never
moulded into the expression of a meaning, nor his mouth opened for
the utterance of a sound. From the first I had been struck with the
extreme and death-like silence that characterised the place of my
confinement; but my mind was occupied with other thoughts, and I had
not adverted to the cause of the phenomenon. I had then felt little
inclination to the converse of a jailor; my natural disposition was
somewhat singular for a Frenchman, and inclined to taciturnity: I had
resolved to make a fair and ample trial of the power of a just defence,
where my innocence was so complete and I was entirely disengaged from
those unfavourable appearances which had constituted my misfortune at
Constance; and I even rejoiced, that a silence, which I regarded as
casual and individual, delivered me from all fear of impertinence in my
attendant. With how different a temper do we contemplate an incident
which, we persuade ourselves, continues to operate only because we
want inclination to remove it; and an incident which is violently
imposed, and to which, with the utmost exertion of our strength, we
cannot succeed to impart the slightest shock! The external object
is the same; its picture in the intellectual sensorium how unlike!
What a profound and inconceivable refinement in the art of tyranny is
this silence! The jailor might well tell me, that beneath his roofs
there was neither complaint nor murmur, that the very soul of its
inhabitants was subdued, and that they suffered the most unheard of
oppressions without astonishment or indignation. This is the peculiar
prerogative of despotism: it produces many symptoms of the same general
appearance as those which are derived from liberty and justice. There
are no remonstrances; there is no impatience or violence; there is a
calm, a fatal and accursed tranquillity that pervades the whole. The
spectator enters, and for a time misinterprets every object he sees;
he perceives human bodies standing or moving around him; and it is
with the utmost surprise, if he has leisure and opportunity to observe
a little further, that he finds at last the things he sees to be the
mere shades of men, cold, inert, glaring bodies, which the heaven-born
soul has long since deserted. Wonderful, I hesitate not to affirm, is
the genuine and direct power of such a situation as that in which I
was now placed, upon the human imagination. What was it then to me, to
whom speech was not merely one of those things, misnamed indulgences,
misnamed luxuries, upon which the desirableness and the health of human
existence depend; but who had looked to it as the only and the assured
means of my rescue from this scene of horrors! I intreat the reader to
pardon me, when I confess, that the operation of the discovery I made
was so overwhelming and apparently desperate, that it was some weeks, I
might say months, before my mind recovered its wonted bias and activity.

It was towards the close of the period I have named, that a new
incident, concurring with that familiarity which serves in some measure
to disarm every mischief of its sting, restored and re-awakened my
mind. I had vegetated now for some time, if the metaphor can with
propriety be applied to existence in a noxious and empoisoned air,
by which all vegetation would have been undermined, and which the
vital principle in man is scarcely competent to surmount; and in
all this period had encountered nothing from without, nor received
any intimation, that could in the slightest degree interrupt the
progressive destruction and waste of the soul. One day, at the
customary hour of my being attended by my warder, I was surprised to
see him bring with him a visiter to my cell. The unknown was a man
with grey hairs and a silver beard: though once tall, he now stooped
considerably, and supported himself with a staff: his dress was simple
and neat, and his whole appearance prepossessing. A sweet serenity was
diffused over his countenance; yet there were occasionally a fire,
and a contemplative grasp of thought, expressed in his eyes, which
sufficiently proved to me that his serenity was not the result of
vacancy. All this I discerned by the faint and uncertain light of a
small lamp which the warder had brought with him, and placed upon my
table. The introduction was performed in silence, and the warder left
us alone. The unknown beckoned me to be seated, for the first emotion
of surprise at the entrance of a stranger had caused me to start on my
feet; and, opening a folding stool he had received from my attendant,
he placed himself beside me.

He then addressed me in a low voice, and told me, that the humanity
of the fathers of the inquisition had given him permission to visit
me, and that, if I would be so obliging, in conformity to the
regulations of the prison, as to lower my voice to the standard of
his, we were at liberty to confer together. He hoped the conference
would be some relief to my solitude, if not lead to my complete
liberation. He then unfolded to me his story. He told me that he, like
myself, had been committed to the prisons of the inquisition upon an
accusation of sorcery. Having advanced thus far, he stopped. He talked
miscellaneously and digressively of wizards and their familiars, of
possessions and demons, of charms, spells, talismans and incantations,
even of the _elixir vitæ_ and the philosopher’s stone. Sometimes in
the progress of this discourse I could perceive him observing me
with the utmost narrowness, as if he would dive into my soul; and
again, particularly when he caught a glance of suspicion in my eye,
with infinite address changing his attitude and tone, and assuming
a surprising air of ingenuousness and gaiety. In a word he was a
consummate actor. It was evident, whether his designs were hostile or
friendly, that his purpose was to make himself master of my secret. I
asked him whether the accusation of sorcery which had been preferred
against him, were well founded or a calumny. He evaded that question,
and was only influenced by it to talk more copiously and fluently on
other topics, with the apparent design of making me forget the enquiry
I had made. He avoided anticipation, lest he should miscalculate and
take wrong ground in my affair; and, though superficially he seemed
communicative, I found that he scarcely told me respecting himself any
one thing definite and clear. He celebrated the clemency of the fathers
of the inquisition. He said, they seemed to regard themselves as the
adoptive parents of those they held in their custody, and were anxious
solely for the restoration of souls. In their exterior they were
austere, and had unfortunately contracted a forbidding manner; but he
had soon found, upon a closer inspection of their character, that the
only way to deal successfully with them was to repose in them a perfect
confidence. This panegyric was not resorted to till he had exhausted
the various topics by which he had hoped himself to extort my secret
from me. I asked him, whether the effect of his reposing confidence
had been an abjuration of sorcery, and reconciliation to the church?
But this question experienced the fate of every other that I addressed
to him. He only told me generally, that he had every reason to be
satisfied with, and to speak well of, the treatment he had experienced
in the house of the inquisition. He possessed, or rather, as I
believed, affected, a character of thoughtless garrulity and loquacity,
well adapted to cover the strange deviations and abrupt transitions
that marked his discourse. It was certainly singularly contrasted with
that close and penetrating air which from time to time I remarked in
him.

The reader may deem it surprising and unaccountable; but certain it is
I took uncommon delight in this man’s company. I pressed him earnestly
to repeat his visits, and would scarcely suffer him to depart, till he
had promised to come to me again the next day or the day after. Yet I
looked on him as my mortal enemy, and had no doubt that he was one of
the infamous wretches, employed by the policy of the inquisition, and
well known beneath those hated roofs by the appellation of _moscas_.
Various reasons may be assigned for my conduct in this particular.
Let it first be remembered that I was alone, and for months had not
heard the sound of my own voice. No incident marked my days; no object
arrested my attention. A dull, heavy, pestilential, soul-depressing
monotony formed the history of my life. If in this situation I had
been visited by a mouse or a rat, I should indefatigably have sought
to get within reach of it, I should have put it to my bosom, and have
felt with exultation the beat of an animal pulse, the warmth of animal
life pressing responsively on my heart. With what eager appetite I
should have mixed in scenes of calamity and cruelty, intolerable to any
other eye, glad for myself that even upon such terms I could escape
the frostbound winter of the soul! How I should have rejoiced, like
king Richard of England, to see four grim and death-dealing assassins
enter my cell, like him to struggle and wrestle and contend with my
murderers, though, as in his case, wounds and a fatal end should be the
result! Thus feeling then, it is little wonderful that I should have
hailed with pleasure the visit of the _mosca_.

But this was not all. While I conferred with, or rather listened to my
visiter, that pride and self complacency, which I suspect to be the
main, or at least the indispensable, ingredient of all our pleasures,
revived in my heart. I believed that he was set upon me by these
insatiable bloodsuckers of the inquisition, that he might ensnare
me with his questions, and treacherously inveigle me to the faggot
and the stake. I felt a last, lambent intimation of pride within me,
when my heart whispered me, “This man shall not attain his ends.” I
secretly defied his arts, and amused myself with baffling his most
cunning devices. I had now some one with whom to measure myself. The
comparison, I own, for a descendant of the counts of St. Leon, was a
humble one; but it is not permitted a prisoner in the jails of the
inquisition to be fastidious in his pleasures. This man I played with
at my ease, and laughed at his stratagems. I therefore felt that I
was his superior, and, which was a sensation I had not lately been
accustomed to, that I was somebody. These feelings recommended to me
his visits.

But what was much more material, I looked further, and proposed an
ultimate end to this occurrence. Let it be recollected what was my
unhappiness, when I found myself, if I may be allowed the expression,
suddenly deprived of speech, and then it will easily be understood
how sincerely I rejoiced to have this faculty restored to me. Speech,
as I have already said, I had regarded as the only and assured means
of my deliverance from this scene of horrors. I therefore doubted
not that from this miserable tool of my oppressors I would obtain my
enlargement. I stood firmly on my guard. I permitted him to run out the
whole length of his own project without interruption. By this delay I
should better understand his character, and finally seize it with a
more decisive grasp. Thus purposing, I allowed three or four visits
to pass before I opened to the _mosca_ my own proposal. I designed
unexpectedly to turn the tables upon him, to surprise and finish with
him at once. I knew not that all this precaution was necessary, but I
played for too deep a stake, not to be anxious to omit nothing, which
hereafter in retrospect I might reproach myself that I had omitted.

The time was at length come, at which I judged it convenient to execute
what I had planned in my mind. I began with an attempt to mortify and
humble my guest in his own eyes, that he might lose the pride to make
the smallest resistance to my proposal.

“Do you think, my good sir,” cried I, “that I have not perfectly
understood your intentions all this while? You have pretended to be
my friend, and to come to me for my good. I know that every secret I
reposed in your fidelity, every word that I might unguardedly have
dropped, every look and gesture that could have been interpreted to my
disadvantage, would have been instantly reported to the fathers of the
inquisition. Why, what a poor and miserable fool must you have imagined
me to be! How came you into my cell? Had you a secret key by which
you found your way hither unknown? Could you ever have come into my
apartment, if you had not been employed? You fawn upon me, and are the
tame and passive agent of my merciless destroyers! Shame on such base
and perfidious proceedings! Is this religion, that you should flatter
and cajole and lie to a man, purely that you may have the gratification
at last of burning him alive? If you or your masters can make out any
thing to my disadvantage, let them make it out in the way of fair and
open trial, by the production of direct evidence, and calling on me
for my defence. They style themselves the champions of Christendom and
ornaments of our holy faith; they pretend to an extraordinary degree
of sanctity, and would have all men bow down in mute reverence and
astonishment at their godliness; and yet they have recourse to means
so base, that the most profligate and abandoned tyrant upon record
would have disdained to employ them. But, base as are the judges and
assessors of the court in whose prison I stand, even they scorn the
meanness of the perfidious task in which you have engaged.”

The vehemence I put into the suppressed and under-tone with which I
delivered these reproaches, seemed to produce no emotion in my guest.
He dropped his staff upon his shoulder; he meekly folded his arms
upon his bosom, and answered, that he had long since learned to bear
every contumely for the cause of God and the Redeemer: they were
heaven-directed chastisements, which his manifold sins and iniquities
had amply deserved.

“Hypocrite!” replied I, “would you make me believe that a conscientious
motive can prompt such conduct as yours, can mould your features into a
treacherous expression of kindness, and fill your mouth with lies and
deceptions innumerable?”

“No proceedings,” rejoined he, with an unaltered air, “are base, that
God and his church prescribe. I take up the cross with cheerfulness,
and glory in my shame. The more ignominious in the eyes of an
unregenerate world is my conduct, the more entire and implicit does it
prove my obedience to be.”

My heart swelled within me as he talked. I could lend no attention
to such despicable cant, and was ashamed to see the most profligate
conduct assuming to itself the pretensions to an extraordinary degree
of sanctity and disinterestedness.

“Come, come,” said I, “dissembler; I know that nothing could buy a man
to so loathsome an office but money. You are some galley-slave, some
wretch, who by your complicated crimes have forfeited your life to the
community, and are now permitted to earn a miserable existence by lying
in wait for the unfortunate, and engaging in arts at which humanity
shudders. I take you upon your own terms; you are the man I want.
Assist me to escape; go with me to some safer and less cruel country;
I will reward you to the extent of your wishes. Give me your hand; an
estate of six thousand pistoles per annum, without further condition,
waits your acceptance. I invoke all the powers, sacred to truth and
punishers of deceit, to witness, that I have ability to make good the
whole of what I promise.”

While I spoke, I could perceive an extraordinary revolution taking
place in my guest. The meekness and tranquillity of his countenance
subsided; his eye became animated and alive. I hailed the auspicious
omen; I urged my proposal with all the impetuosity I could exert and
all the arguments I could devise. At length I paused. I looked again
at the countenance of the _mosca_; I was less pleased than before. The
expression did not seem to be that of assent and congratulation; it was
rather of horror and alarm.

“St. Jago, and all the saints and angels of heaven, protect me!”
exclaimed he. “What do I hear? A full confession of guilt! And art
thou then the confederate of the prince of the powers of darkness? If
we were not here, in the holy house of inquisition, I should die at
this moment with fear that the roof would fall and crush us together.
I should expect hell to swallow me alive, for being found in thy
unhallowed society.” He trembled with every expression of the sincerest
terror and aversion.

“‘Thy money perish with thee,’ thou second Elymas, like him ‘full
of all subtlety and mischief, child of the devil, enemy of all
righteousness!’ Blasted be thy offers! Have I for this devoted myself
to the service of God, assiduously sought out the basest and vilest
offices of that service, and loaded myself with ignominy here, that I
might obtain a crown of glory hereafter? and am I now to be assaulted
with the worst of Satan’s temptations? Even so, Lord, if such be thy
will! Oh, poor, miserable, deluded victim of the arch-deceiver of
mankind, what has the devil done for thee? He has persuaded thee that
thou art rich; and thou wantest every joy and every necessary of life.
He has promised to be thy friend; and he brings thee to the faggot and
flames in this world, as an earnest of thy eternal damnation hereafter.”

My visiter had no sooner thus poured out the tumult and agitation of
his soul, than he left me abruptly, and I saw him no more.

Such was the event of my attempt to bribe the officers of the
inquisition. In my first experiment I could not even obtain a hearing;
in what followed, my proposals were rejected with all the transports
of religious abhorrence. What I offered indeed, however dazzling in
the statement, had not in fact the nature of a temptation. He to whom
I addressed it gave no credit to my assertions; he thought that I was
the mere drivelling dupe of him he called the arch-deceiver of mankind,
or that my money, when possessed, would soon change its figure, and
from seeming pieces of solid coin be converted into pieces of horn or
of shells. Even if he had not apprehended such a metamorphosis, he
would yet have regarded every doubloon he received as the price of his
continual adversity here, and damnation hereafter. I gained nothing
favourable for my situation by the trial I had made, but I added a
new chapter to my knowledge of human nature. I found, that to be a
knave, it was not necessary to be an infidel: I corrected the too hasty
conclusion which I had adopted with the rest of my contemporaries,
that he whose conduct was infamous, must inevitably be destitute of
religious impressions and belief; and I became satisfied that a man,
while he practised every vice that can disgrace human nature, might
imagine he was doing God service.

Enough of the interior of the prison of the inquisition. I remained a
tenant of this wretched mansion twelve years. Though the wretch who had
been placed upon me as a spy, was, from my proposal to him, satisfied
of my guilt, his superiors were not so. They found nothing in what he
reported definitive as to the nature of my unlawful practices, and they
could extort from me no further confession. They therefore adhered
to their favourite maxim, to avoid the precipitate mistakes of other
tribunals, and to allow their prisoner full time to develop his guilt,
or, as they pretended, to establish his innocence. Perhaps too the
temper of the prince who now filled the Spanish throne, contributed to
my safety. They could not content themselves with a less punishment for
so obstinate and incorrigible a heretic, than that of the flames; but,
during the reign of the emperor Charles, this species of punishment
for heresy was rarely inflicted, and only one or two contumacious,
at intervals, were delivered over to the executioner at a time. The
institution whose victim I had become, looked for a richer and more
abundant harvest from the well-known piety and zeal of his successor.

I pass over the rest of the years of my tedious imprisonment They had
in them a sad and death-like uniformity. What surprising or agreeable
adventures can be expected from a man closed up within the four walls
of a dungeon? Yet it is not altogether the uniformity of this period
that determines me not to dwell upon and expand it. Twelve years
cannot pass in the life of man without many memorable incidents and
occurrences. He that should be buried alive in the deepest cavern
of the earth, if he were not an idiot, or incapable of the task of
narration, and could subsist twelve years in that situation, could
tell of things that occurred to him, that might fill the busy man of
the world with thoughts and speculation almost to bursting. I might
unfold the secrets of my prison-house, but that I will not. I refuse
the consequences of that story both to my readers and myself. I have no
inclination to drive the most delicate or susceptible of my readers mad
with horrors. I could convince such, if such there are, who suppose my
faculties were altogether benumbed or dead, that it was not so. I did
indeed pass days, perhaps weeks, in a condition of that sort. But at
other times my mind was roused, and became busy, restless, impatient,
and inventive. There was no mode of escape that I did not ruminate
upon or attempt; not to mention that, though my body was restrained,
my mind occasionally soared to the furthest regions of the empyrean,
or plunged into the deepest of the recesses in which nature conceals
her operations. All systems of philosophising became familiar to me. I
revolved every different fable that has been constructed respecting the
invisible powers that superintend the events of the boundless universe;
and I fearlessly traced out and developed the boldest conjectures and
assertions of demonism or atheism. As the humour of the moment led me,
I derived misery or consolation from each of these systems in their
turn.--But memory, bitter memory, unperceived by its lord, is seizing
my pen, and running away with my narrative. Enough, enough of the
interior of the prison of the inquisition!




CHAPTER XXXII.


Philip the Second, king of Spain, succeeded to the throne of that
monarchy about the close of the year 1555; but his affairs in England
and the Netherlands long withheld him from visiting his beloved
country, and he did not reach its shores, after a seven years’ absence,
till the twenty-ninth of August, 1559. It may be thought that a public
event of this sort could be little interesting to me, a forgotten
prisoner, immured in the dungeons of the inquisition. The fact was
otherwise. The king was desirous of distinguishing his arrival on
his native soil by some splendid exhibition or memorable event, that
should at once express his piety to God, and conduce to the felicity
of his people: and he could think of nothing that so signally united
these characters as an _Auto de Fé_. The Lutheran heresy, which in the
course of forty years had spread its poison so widely in the different
countries of Europe, had not failed to scatter a few of its noxious
seeds even in this, the purest and most Catholic of all its divisions.
But Philip had early proclaimed his hostility against this innovation;
and, prostrating himself before the image of his Saviour, had earnestly
besought the divine majesty, “that he might never suffer himself to
be, or to be called, the lord of those in any corner of the globe,
who should deny Him the Lord.” Previously to his arrival in Spain,
directions had been given, and arrangements made, respecting the pious
and solemn exhibition he demanded. Formerly those who by the fathers of
the inquisition had been delivered over to the secular arm, had been
executed in the different places where their crimes had been committed,
or their trials been held: but now it was proposed that all those
throughout the kingdom, who were found properly qualified to satisfy by
their deaths the sublime taste of the royal saint, should be divided
into two troops, and sent, the one to Seville, long the capital of an
illustrious monarchy, and the other to Valladolid, which had the honour
to be the birthplace of the present sovereign. The troop destined to
feed the flames at Seville was composed of fifty persons, many of them
distinguished for their rank, their talents, or their virtues. The
troop to be escorted to Valladolid, of which I was a member, amounted
only to thirty: but to compensate this deficiency, Philip himself had
signified his gracious intention to be present, together with the heir
apparent and his whole court, at that exhibition. The Spanish nation,
rejoicing in the approach of a monarch who was born among them, whose
manners and temper happily accorded with theirs, and whom they believed
about to fix his perpetual residence in their land, expected him with
all the longings of the most ardent attachment. We, the unhappy victims
of pious and inquisitorial tyranny, also expected him. Our hearts did
not pant with a less beating quickness; though our anxiety arose from
emotions of a different nature.

Valladolid is distant from the metropolis eighty-four miles. We had
already been some weeks prepared for this journey, and piously directed
to hold ourselves in readiness to take our part in the solemn national
sacrifice. We waited however to receive a previous notice of the day
on which the monarch would enter the place of his birth, since so
great was his royal zeal for the cause of religion and civil society,
that he would not consent to be absent from any part of the spectacle;
and accordingly it was not allowed us to enter the scene of our final
destination, till the king of Spain and the Indies should be already
on the spot, and prepared to receive us. The _auto da fé_ performed at
Seville had the precedence of ours: it took place on the twenty-fourth
of September; and we were indulged with an accurate account of it,
and were present at a public reading of the record of the act, in the
chapel of our prison, previously to our removal from the metropolis.

I will not enter into a minute detail of the scene of this reading,
though the recollection will never be effaced from my memory. Of the
persons present who were destined to suffer capital punishment, eight
were women. Four of them were taken from a single family, being a
grandmother, a mother, and two daughters of the noble house of Alcala.
They had all been beautiful of person, and of a graceful figure; the
youngest of the daughters was in the nineteenth year of her age. Their
crime, together with that of the majority of their fellow-sufferers,
was obstinate and impenitent Lutheranism. The seats of the women were
separated from the rest, and fronted with a close lattice. The men
were twenty-two in number, and their appearance was truly impressive.
Their persons were neglected, and their figures emaciated; their eyes
were sunk and ghastly, and their complexions of a sallow and death-like
white. Most of them were crippled by their long confinement and the
severities they had endured, and were supported to their seats, upon
an elevated scaffolding with benches raised one above another, by two
apparators, one on each side of the condemned heretic. God of mercy
and benevolence! is it possible that this scene should be regarded
as thy triumph, and the execution destined to follow, as a sacrifice
acceptable in thy sight? If these papers of mine are ever produced to
light, may it not happen that they shall first be read by a distant
posterity, who will refuse to believe that their fathers were ever
mad enough to subject each other to so horrible a treatment, merely
because they were unable to adopt each other’s opinions? Oh, no! human
affairs, like the waves of the ocean, are merely in a state of ebb and
flow: “there is nothing new under the sun:” two centuries perhaps after
Philip the Second shall be gathered to his ancestors [he died in 1598],
men shall learn over again to persecute each other for conscience
sake; other anabaptists or levellers shall furnish pretexts for new
persecutions; other inquisitors shall arise in the most enlightened
tracts of Europe; and professors from their chair, sheltering their
intolerance under the great names of Aristotle and Cicero, shall
instruct their scholars, that a heterodox doctrine is the worst of
crimes, and that the philanthropy and purity of heart in which it is
maintained, only render its defenders the more worthy to be extirpated.

What were the ideas and reflections of my fellows, seated on the
benches above, below, and on either side of me, I am unable to affirm;
my own could not fail to be pungent and distressing. I understood
continually more and more of the mysterious and unuttered history, of
the stranger who died in the summer-house of the lake of Constance: I
found that I was only acting over again what he had experienced before
me. His legacies had served to involve me in the bitterest and most
unheard of miseries, but were wholly destitute of ability to rescue
from the evils themselves created. Unbounded wealth I found to have
no power to bribe the dastard slaves of religious bigotry; and the
elixir of immortality, though it could cure disease, and put to flight
the approaches of age, was impotent to repel the fervour of devouring
flames. I might have been happy----I was happy when the stranger found
me. I might have lived to a virtuous and venerable old age, and have
died in the arms of my posterity. The stranger had given me wealth, and
I was now poorer than the peasant who wanders amidst polar snows. The
stranger had given me immortality, and in a few days I was to expire in
excruciating tortures. He found me tranquil, contented, in the midst
of simple, yet inestimable pleasures; he breathed into me the restless
sentiment of ambition; and it was that sentiment which at length
had placed me on high in the chapel of the prison of the Catholic
Inquisition.

Our progress to Valladolid was slow and solemn, and occupied a space of
no less than four days. On the evening of the fourth day we approached
that city. The king and his court came out to meet us. He saluted
the inquisitor general with all the demonstrations of the deepest
submission and humility; and then, having yielded him the place of
honour, turned round his horse, and accompanied us to Valladolid. The
cavalcade that attended the king broke into two files, and received us
in the midst of them. The whole city seemed to empty itself on this
memorable occasion; and the multitudes that crowded along the road,
and were scattered in the neighbouring fields, were innumerable. The
day was now closed; and the procession went forward amidst the light
of a thousand torches. We, the condemned of the inquisition, had been
conducted from the metropolis upon tumbrils; but, as we arrived at the
gates of Valladolid, we were commanded, for the greater humiliation, to
alight and proceed on foot to the place of our confinement, as many as
could not walk without assistance being supported by the attendants. We
were neither chained nor bound; the practice of the inquisition being
to deliver the condemned upon such occasions into the hands of two
sureties each, who placed their charge in the middle between them; and
men of the most respectable characters were accustomed from religious
motives to sue for this melancholy office.

Dejected and despairing I entered the streets of the city, no object
present to the eyes of my mind but that of my approaching execution.
The crowd was vast; the confusion inexpressible. As we passed by the
end of a narrow lane, the horse of one of the guards who rode exactly
in a line with me, plunged and reared in a violent manner, and at
length threw his rider upon the pavement. Others of the horse-guards
attempted to catch the bridle of the enraged animal. They rushed
against each other. Several of the crowd were thrown down, and trampled
under the horses’ feet. The shrieks of these, and the loud cries and
exclamations of the bystanders, mingled in confused and discordant
chorus. No sound, no object could be distinguished. From the excess
of the tumult a sudden thought darted into my mind, where all, an
instant before, had been relaxation and despair. Two or three of the
horses pushed forward in a particular direction. A moment after they
resiled with equal violence, and left a wide, but transitory gap. My
project was no sooner conceived than executed. Weak as I had just now
felt myself, a supernatural tide of strength seemed to come over me. I
sprung away with all imaginable impetuosity, and rushed down the lane
I have just mentioned. Every one amidst the confusion was attentive to
his personal safety, and several minutes elapsed before I was missed.




CHAPTER XXXIII.


In the lane every thing was silent, and the darkness was extreme. Man,
woman, and child were gone out to view the procession. For some time I
could scarcely distinguish a single object; the doors and windows were
all closed. I now chanced to come to an open door; within I saw no one
but an old man, who was busy over some metallic work at a chafing-dish
of fire. I had no room for choice; I expected every moment to hear the
myrmidons of the inquisition at my heels. I rushed in; I impetuously
closed the door, and bolted it; I then seized the old man by the collar
of his shirt with a determined grasp, and swore vehemently that I
would annihilate him that instant, if he did not consent to afford me
assistance. Though for some time I had perhaps been feebler than he,
the terror that now drove me on, rendered me comparatively a giant. He
intreated me to permit him to breathe, and promised to do whatever I
should desire. I looked round the apartment, and saw a rapier hanging
against the wall, of which I instantly proceeded to make myself
master. While I was doing this, my involuntary host, who was extremely
terrified at my procedure, nimbly attempted to slip by me and rush into
the street. With difficulty I caught hold of his arm, and, pulling him
back, put the point of my rapier to his breast, solemnly assuring him
that no consideration on earth should save him from my fury, if he
attempted to escape a second time. He immediately dropped on his knees,
and with the most piteous accents intreated me to spare his life. I
told him that I was no robber, that I did not intend him the slightest
harm, and that, if he would implicitly yield to my direction, he might
assure himself he never should have reason to repent his compliance.
By this declaration the terrors of the old man were somewhat appeased.
I took the opportunity of this calm to go to the street door, which I
instantly locked, and put the key in my bosom.

Nothing but the most fortunate concurrence of circumstances could
have thus forwarded my escape. The rearing of the horse of the
life-guardsman was purely accidental. The concourse and press of the
crowd from all sides could alone have rendered this circumstance of any
magnitude. The gap which was made by the pushing forwards and resiling
of the horses continued barely long enough for me to spring through,
and closed again in an instant. It is astonishing that the thought
of escape should have thus suddenly darted into my mind, which, but
a moment before, was in a state of dejection, equally incompatible
with activity and with hope. That in the lane down which I rushed I
should have met no human creature, and that the first open door I
saw should lead to the residence of a decrepid old man, who appeared
to be its single inhabitant, were occurrences equally extraordinary,
yet seem to have been both indispensable to my safety. One point
more concurred with this fortunate train, and assisted to still the
palpitations of my beating heart: I perceived, by certain indications
in the countenance of my host, that he was by parentage a Jew. I
presently concluded, that he was what in Spain they denominate a new
christian; for that otherwise he would not have been allowed to reside
at large in a Spanish city. But, upon that supposition, I did not
believe that christianity was very deeply mingled up in him with the
vital principle: the converts of the inquisition are not conspicuous
for their sincerity. Now, then, for the first time I thought, in the
course of twelve years, I had opportunity to communicate with a man,
whose soul was not enslaved to the blood-thirsty superstition of this
devoted country. All I had seen during the period of my confinement
were hyenas, tigers, and crocodiles--they were not men.

I had no sooner soothed my host into a temper to listen to my story,
than I told him with all imaginable frankness whence I came, and
to what I had been destined. The mention of sorcery however, and
preternatural practices, I suppressed; for I suspected that persons of
all religions entertained an equal horror against these. I suffered
him to imagine that the allegation against me had been the crime of
heresy: all sects of the christian superstition might be supposed
equally obnoxious or acceptable to a Jew. I emphatically appealed to
the persecutions which had been so long directed against the religion
of his ancestors, and observed how disgraceful it would be in him
to assist the operation of a principle, the effects of which his
fathers had so deeply deplored, and so perfectly abhorred. I assured
him that I would bring him into no danger, and that all I asked was
the protection of a few hours: I would leave him in the course of
the following day, and he should hear of me no more. I reminded him,
that the danger he had to fear was in betraying, not in protecting
me. The inquisition looked upon every new christian with an eye of
the severest jealousy; and the mere fact, if known, that I had taken
refuge in his house, would infallibly subject him to the purgation of a
temporary imprisonment in their dungeons. It would be in vain for him
to affirm that he had no choice in what had occurred; he was without a
witness to confirm his relation, and the assertions of a man born of
Jewish parents never obtained credit in the court of the inquisition.
I added, with solemn asseverations, that the moment I set foot beyond
the territory of Spain, I would remit to him the sum of six hundred
pistoles as an acknowledgment for his kindness.

During the whole of my discourse, I watched his countenance with the
utmost minuteness. It gradually relaxed from the terror which had at
first appeared in it, to expressions of compassion and complacence.
I saw nothing that ought to alarm me. When it was his turn to speak,
he earnestly assured me that he took a warm interest in my story,
and would cheerfully perform every thing I required. He was happy
that my favourable stars had led me to his habitation, and would
rejoice, to the latest hour of his existence, if they rendered him
instrumental in preserving the life of a human being from so deplorable
a catastrophe. While I talked to him, I easily perceived that the
arguments I used, which produced the most sensible effect upon his
features, were those of the dangers arising to him from betraying
me, and the reward of six hundred pistoles which I promised him in
the event of my success. His motives however were blended together
in his mind; and he had no sooner formed a determination, grounded
perhaps upon the meanest considerations, than he became eloquent in
a panegyric of his own benevolence, by which he was not, I believe,
more anxious to impose upon me, than to put the change upon himself. I
considered all that he said, his gestures, and the very tones of his
voice, with eager anxiety; the terror of the inquisition penetrated to
the marrow in my bones; and the fate awarded against me by that court
became inexpressibly more horrible to my thoughts, now that I saw the
probability of escaping it. Every thing that I observed in the Jew was
apparently fair, plausible, and encouraging; but nothing had power to
quell the agitations of my apprehensive soul.

We were still engaged in discussing the topics I have mentioned, when
I was suddenly alarmed by the noise of some one stirring in the inner
apartment. I had looked into this room, and had perceived nothing
but the bed upon which the old man nightly reposed himself. I sprung
up however at the sound, and, perceiving that the door had a bolt on
the outside, I eagerly fastened it. I then turned to Mordecai, such
previously to his conversion had been the name of my host: “Wretch,”
said I, “did not you assure me that there was no one but yourself in
the house?” “Oh,” cried Mordecai, “it is my child! it is my child!
she went into the inner apartment, and has fallen asleep on the bed.”
“Beware!” I answered; “the slightest falsehood more shall instantly be
expiated in your blood.” “I call Abraham to witness,” rejoined the once
more terrified Jew, “it is my child! only my child!” “Tell me,” cried
I, with severity of accent, “how old is this child?” “Only five years,”
said Mordecai: “my dear Leah died when her babe was no more than a year
old; and, though we had several children, this single one has survived
her.” “Speak to your child; let me hear her voice!” He spoke to her,
and she answered, “Father, I want to come out.” I was satisfied it was
the voice of a little girl. I turned to the Jew: “Take care,” said I,
“how you deceive me now; is there no other person in that room?” He
imprecated a curse on himself if there were: I opened the door with
caution, and the little girl came forward. As soon as I saw her, I
seized her with a rapid motion, and retired back to a chair. “Man,”
said I, “you have trifled with me too rashly; you have not considered
what I am escaped from, and what I have to fear; from this moment this
child shall be the pledge of my safety; I will not part with her an
instant as long as I remain in your house; and with this rapier in my
hand I will pierce her to the heart, the moment I am led to imagine
that I am no longer in safety.” The Jew trembled at my resolution;
the emotions of a father worked in his features, and glistened in his
eye. “At least let me kiss her!” said he. “Be it so!” replied I: “one
embrace, and then, till the dawn of the coming day, she remains with
me.” I released my hold; the child rushed to her father, and he caught
her in his arms. “My dear Leah,” cried Mordecai, “now a sainted spirit
in the bosom of our father Abraham! I call God to witness between us,
that, if all my caution and vigilance can prevent it, not a hair of
this child shall be injured! Stranger, you little know by how strong
a motive you have now engaged me to your cause. We poor Jews, hunted
on the face of the earth, the abhorrence and execration of mankind,
have nothing but family affections to support us under our multiplied
disgraces; and family affections are entwined with our existence, the
fondest and best-loved part of ourselves. The God of Abraham bless you,
my child! Now, sir, speak! what is it you require of me?”

I told the Jew that I must have a suit of clothes conformable to the
appearance of a Spanish cavalier, and certain medical ingredients that
I named to him, together with his chafing-dish of coals to prepare
them; and, that done, I would then impose on him no further trouble.
Having received his instructions, he immediately set out to procure
what I demanded. He took with him the key of the house; and, as soon
as he was gone, I retired with the child into the inner apartment, and
fastened the door. At first I applied myself to tranquillise the child,
who had been somewhat alarmed at what she had heard and seen: this
was no very difficult task. She presently left me, to amuse herself
with some playthings that lay scattered in a corner of the apartment.
My heart was now comparatively at ease; I saw the powerful hold I had
on the fidelity of the Jew, and firmly persuaded myself that I had no
treachery to fear on his part. Thus circumstanced, the exertion and
activity with which I had lately been imbued left me; and I insensibly
sunk into a sort of slumber.

The night was now far advanced, and I was still reclined insensible
upon Mordecai’s bed, when suddenly a jargon of various sounds seemed
from all sides to assail me. My mind was confused; I heard something,
but seemed wholly unconscious what I was, and where. I wanted to
escape from the disturbance; but it continued, and even increased.
At length I was forced to command my attention; and the first thing I
perceived was a beating at the door of the chamber. The little girl
was come to the bedside, and endeavouring to shake me. “Sir, sir,” she
cried in an eager accent, “my father wants to come in, and I cannot
slip the bolt of the door.” By slow degrees I began to comprehend my
situation, and to recollect what had happened immediately before.
I felt greatly alarmed; I feared by the disturbance that Mordecai
had not returned alone. I essayed to speak; my organs refused their
office. I endeavoured to move; my limbs felt palsied, and absolutely
lifeless. I experienced a sinking and sickness of heart that seemed to
be the immediate precursor of death. By listening occasionally to the
discourse which the father and the daughter began to hold with each
other, I became satisfied that Mordecai was without a companion. I
endeavoured to make the little girl understand that I was incapable of
rising from the bed; and, having at length succeeded, she communicated
the information to her father. With considerable trouble he loosened
the door at its hinges, and entered the room. I found myself in the
extremest degree feeble and languid; the Jew however assiduously
administered to me of cordials he had in his possession, and by degrees
I felt myself considerably restored.

Now, for the first time, I was at leisure to attend to the state of
my strength and my health. My confinement in the inquisition, and the
treatment I had experienced, had before rendered me feeble, and almost
helpless; but these appeared to be circumstances scarcely worthy of
attention, in the situation in which I was then placed. The impulse I
felt, in the midst of the confusion in the grand street of Valladolid,
produced in me an energy and power of exertion which nothing but the
actual experience of the fact could have persuaded me was possible.
This energy, once begun, appeared to have the faculty of prolonging
itself; and I did not relapse into imbecility, till the occasion
seemed to be exhausted which called for my exertion. I examined myself
by a mirror with which Mordecai furnished me: I found my hair as
white as snow, and my face ploughed with a thousand furrows. I was
now fifty-four, an age which, with moderate exercise and a vigorous
constitution, often appears like the prime of human existence; but
whoever had looked upon me in my present condition, would not have
hesitated to affirm that I had reached the eightieth year of my age.
I examined with dispassionate remark the state of my intellect: I was
persuaded that it had subsided into childishness. My mind had been as
much cribbed and immured as my body. I was the mere shadow of a man,
of no more power and worth than that which a magic lantern produces
upon a wall. These are thy works, Superstition!--this the genuine and
proper operation of what is called Christianity! Let the reader judge
of what I had passed through and known within those cursed walls by the
effects; I have already refused, I continue to refuse, to tell what I
suffered, and how those effects were produced. Enough of compassion,
enough of complaint: I will confine myself, as far as I am able, to
simple history.

Being recovered, as far as the cordials and attention of Mordecai were
capable of recovering me, I desired for the remainder of the night
to be alone, except that I was still resolved to retain the little
Jewess as the pledge of my safety. I was greatly obliged to my host for
the punctuality he had already displayed: he had found considerable
difficulty in procuring the articles of which I stood in need, owing
partly to the lateness of the hour, and partly to the presence of the
king, and the general hurry and confusion which had been produced by
the solemn entry of the inquisition. His efforts too to recover me
from the languor and lethargy into which I had sunk, had a character
of generosity; and perhaps I ought now to have trusted him without a
hostage. But my heart was too earnestly bent upon accomplishing its
present object, to afford harbour to the punctilios of delicacy. The
same earnestness caused me to insist upon Mordecai’s repairing the
injury which the hinges of the door had sustained; and I was careful
to satisfy myself that every thing was restored to a state of perfect
security.

I was now once again alone. The little girl, who had been unusually
disturbed, and roused at an unseasonable hour, sunk into a profound
sleep. I heard the noise which Mordecai made in undressing himself,
and composing his limbs upon a mattrass, which he had dragged for the
present occasion into the front room, and spread before the hearth. I
soon found by the hardness of his breathing that he also was asleep.
I unfolded the papers he had brought me; they consisted of various
medical ingredients I had directed him to procure; there were also two
or three vials, containing syrups and essences. I had near me a pair
of scales with which to weigh my ingredients; a vessel of water; the
chafing-dish of my host, in which the fire was nearly extinguished;
and a small taper, with some charcoal to relight the fire, in case
of necessity. While I was occupied in surveying these articles and
arranging my materials, a sort of torpor came suddenly over me, so as
to allow me no time for resistance. I sunk upon the bed. I remained
thus for about half an hour, seemingly without the power of collecting
my thoughts. At length I started, felt alarmed, and applied my utmost
force of mind to rouse my exertions. While I drove, or attempted to
drive, my animal spirits from limb to limb, and from part to part,
as if to enquire into the general condition of my frame, I became
convinced that I was dying. Let not the reader be surprised at this:
twelve years’ imprisonment, in a narrow and unwholesome cell, may
well account for so sudden a catastrophe. Strange and paradoxical as
it may seem, I believe it will be found in the experiment that the
calm and security which succeed to great internal injuries are more
dangerous than the pangs and hardships that went before. I was now
thoroughly alarmed: I applied myself, with all vigilance and expedition
to the compounding my materials. The fire was gone out; the taper was
glimmering in the socket: to swallow the julep when I had prepared
it, seemed to be the last effort of which my organs and muscles were
capable. It was the elixir of immortality, exactly made up according to
the prescription of the stranger.

Whether from the potency of the medicine, or the effect of imagination,
I felt revived the moment I had swallowed it. I placed myself
deliberately in Mordecai’s bed, and drew over me the bed-clothes. I
fell asleep almost instantly. I believe my first sleep was perfectly
sound and insensible; but in no long time I was visited with the
pleasantest dreams imaginable. Nothing was distinct; nothing was
attended with the consciousness of my former identity; but every thing
was gay, cheerful, invigorating, and delicious. I wandered amidst
verdant lawns, and flower-enamelled gardens. I was saluted with the
singing of a thousand birds, and the murmuring of a thousand fountains.
Kids, fawns, and lambs frisked and gamboled before me. At a distance,
through an opening in the trees, I discerned nymphs and their swains
dancing a variety of antic measures. I advanced towards them; they
approached towards me. Fifes, oboes, recorders, and instruments of a
hundred names, commenced a cheerful and melodious concert. Myself and
the dancers now were met; they placed me in the midst of them. They
began a choral song; the motion of their limbs conformed to their
numbers. I was the theme of the general chaunt; they ascribed to me the
beauty of Apollo, the strength of Hercules, the invention of Mercury,
and the youth of Bacchus.

My sleep was not long; in a few hours I awakened. With difficulty I
recognised the objects about me, and recollected where I had been. It
seemed to me that my heart had never beat so vigorously, nor my spirits
flowed so gay. I was all elasticity and life; I could scarcely hold
myself quiet; I felt impelled to bound and leap like a kid upon the
mountains. I perceived that my little Jewess was still asleep; she had
been unusually fatigued the night before. I know not whether Mordecai’s
hour of rising were come; if it were, he was careful not to disturb his
guest. I put on the garments he had prepared; I gazed upon the mirror
he had left in my apartment. I can recollect no sensation in the course
of my life, so unexpected and surprising as what I felt at that moment.
The evening before, I had seen my hair white, and my face ploughed with
furrows; I looked fourscore. What I beheld now was totally different,
yet altogether familiar; it was myself, myself as I had appeared on the
day of my marriage with Marguerite de Damville; the eyes, the mouth,
the hair, the complexion, every circumstance, point by point, the same.
I leaped a gulf of thirty-two years. I waked from a dream, troublesome
and distressful beyond all description; but it vanished, like the
shades of night upon the burst of a glorious morning in July, and left
not a trace behind. I knew not how to take away my eyes from the mirror
before me.

I soon began to consider that, if it were astonishing to me that,
through all the regions of my countenance, I could discover no trace of
what I had been the night before, it would be still more astonishing
to my host. This sort of sensation I had not the smallest ambition to
produce: one of the advantages of the metamorphosis I had sustained,
consisted in its tendency, in the eyes of all that saw me, to cut off
every species of connection between my present and my former self. It
fortunately happened that the room in which I slept, being constructed
upon the model of many others in Spain, had a stair at the further
end, with a trap-door in the ceiling, for the purpose of enabling the
inhabitant to ascend on the roof in the cool of the day. The roofs
were flat, and so constructed, that there was little difficulty in
passing along them from house to house, from one end of the street to
the other. I availed myself of the opportunity, and took leave of the
residence of my land host in a way perfectly unceremonious, determined
however speedily to transmit to him the reward I had promised. It may
easily be believed that Mordecai was not less rejoiced at the absence
of a guest whom the vigilance of the inquisition rendered an uncommonly
dangerous one, than I was to quit his habitation. I closed the trap
after me, and clambered from roof to roof to a considerable distance.
At length I encountered the occasion of an open window, and fortunately
descended, unseen by any human being, into the street. Having with
difficulty succeeded, on this occasion of public solemnity, in engaging
an apartment in one of the hotels of Valladolid, I sent into it, as
soon as I was able, a chest, containing every necessary of apparel, and
particularly a suit of clothes. I then changed my dress, and threw the
clothes which Mordecai had provided into the chest I had purchased. As
long as they continued safely locked up, and the key in my possession,
no faculty possessed by any human creature could detect my identity,
and expose me afresh to my former jailors. The only peril under which
I had before laboured, was from Mordecai, who, if he had seen me in the
garments he had procured, might have recognised them; and, though a
peril from this source came barely within the limits of possibility, it
was easily avoided, and I therefore chose to avoid it.

I passed the whole of this day in a species of enjoyment, which, as it
has no parallel in the ordinary transactions of mankind, so are there
no terms in the received languages of the world that are adequate
to the description of it. It has often been a subject of melancholy
and complaint among mortals, that, while the whole vegetable system
contains in it a principle of perpetual renewal, man alone,--the
ornament and lord of the universe, man,--knows no return to youth.
When the sun declines in the west, the flowers droop, and fold up
their frail and delicate leaves; but soon the eyelids of the morn
are again opened, and again they rejoice in his invigorating beams.
Upon the approach of winter, the beech, the ash, and the monarch-oak,
scatter their withered foliage over the plains; but spring reappears,
and nakedness is no longer their reproach, and they clothe themselves
anew in their leafy honours. With what a melancholy sensation does
the old man survey his decaying limbs! To me, he cries, there is no
second morning, and no returning spring. My head, pressed down with
years, shall never again erect itself in conscious manhood. These hoary
locks shall no more be adorned with the auburn of glossy youth. My
weather-beaten trunk shall at no time clothe itself with a smoother
rind. A recruited marrow shall never fill these bones, nor a more
vigorous sap circulate through my unstrung limbs. I recollect what I
was in the prime of manhood, with vain regrets; the memory answers no
other end than to torment and upbraid me.

The useless wish of the old man, the object of his hopeless sigh, was
mine. Common and every-day blessings have little value in the eye of
their possessor. The young man squanders the endowments of youth, and
knows not to prize them. If the young man had once been old, if the
old man could again be young, then, and then only, they would justly
estimate their wealth. The springy limb, the bounding frame, the vigour
that sets fatigue at defiance, and revels in pleasures unexhausted,
would then by the near and conscious comparison, of feebleness and
lassitude, the drooping limb, the aching head, and the frame decayed in
all its senses, be well understood. Such was my situation. Yesterday
I was fourscore; to-day I was twenty. Yesterday I was a prisoner,
crippled in every articulation; to-day I was a citizen of the world,
capable of all its delights. To-morrow I was destined to have been
dragged to the stake with ignominy, and to suffer intolerable anguish
amidst the shouts and huzzas of an unfeeling populace; to-morrow I was
at liberty to employ as I pleased, to choose the theatre upon which it
should be spent, and the gratifications that should be crowded into
it. What was most material, my mind was grown young with my body.
Weary of eternal struggle, I had lately resigned the contest, and sunk
under the ill-fortune that relentlessly pursued me. Now I felt within
me a superfluity of vigour; I panted for something to contend with,
and something to conquer. My senses unfolded themselves to all the
curiosity of remark; my thoughts seemed capable of industry unwearied,
and investigation the most constant and invincible. Ambition revived
in my bosom; I longed for new engagements and new relations; I desired
to perform something, that I might myself regard with complacence, and
that I might see the world start at and applaud.

I determined, for reasons that I shall presently have occasion to
unfold, that my first visit should be to my daughters at my paternal
estate of St. Leon. I proposed to spend two or three days in
preparations for this journey. By mere accident, by a most censurable
heedlessness, I became in some degree a spectator of the _auto da fé_
in which I was destined to have been a victim. Unawares I had become
entangled in the crowd, and could with difficulty escape, or even
prevent my being carried nearer the centre of the scene. I saw the
galleries and accommodations that had been erected for the spectators:
I saw the windows and roofs of the houses crowded with beholders. The
shrieks of the sufferers I could not hear; they were drowned in the
infernal exultations of the multitude. But what was worst of all,
I discerned some of the condemned, fixed as they were upon small
boards, near the top of stakes about four yards high, and therefore
greatly above the heads of the assembly, while the flames, abundantly
fed with faggots and dry fuel, climbed aloft, and seemed eager to
embrace their victims. As I have already said, there were thirty of
these death-devoted frames; and, if my eye did not count them all, my
fancy well supplied what sense was unable to discover. The impression
I felt at that moment was horrible beyond all conception. I exerted
my new-found strength, and pushed out of the press with irresistible
vigour. If at that instant I could have felt exultation, even in the
consciousness of my own safety, I should regard myself as the most
execrable of monsters.




CHAPTER XXXIV.


The first employment in which I purposed to engage my new-found liberty
and youth, was a visit to my daughters. I now carried a disguise
perpetually about with me, that would render my journey incapable of
proving injurious to them. My daughters were all that remained, if
indeed they still remained, of my once idolised family. For twelve
years I had continued totally ignorant of their fortune, and even of
their existence. Part of the plan I had adopted for their advantage
necessarily precluded me from all correspondence or communication
with them or any one near them, that might satisfy and tranquillise
the anxieties of a father. If it had been otherwise, deprived, as
I had been, of the common benefits of light and air, and cast out
from the society of mankind, I could have obtained no intelligence
of their welfare. In visiting, I determined not to make myself known
to them; yet, notwithstanding the greatness of this disadvantage, I
felt that one of the most exquisite gratifications the earth could
afford me was to behold my children. What a multitude of adventures
and incidents might they not have encountered in the space of twelve
years! Imagination and affection dwell impatiently on the interval;
nor can any thing quiet the conjectures of him that loves, short of
the most complete information. What a difference must twelve years
have produced in the very persons and figures of creatures so young?
With what mingled and exquisite emotions does the father contemplate
his daughter, whom he left a child, grown up into a woman? He sees her
with astonishment and rapture, displaying maturer beauties, discovering
in her countenance new traces of knowledge and sentiment, and in her
gesture and manners a character finished, matronly, and sedate. The
very circumstance that I should visit them unknown, and converse
intimately with them without being discovered, while it cut me off
from many pure and ingenuous pleasures, added in some respects a new
relish to the indulgence; for it gave it a character, singular, and
perhaps unprecedented, in the history of mankind. I anticipated with
eager transport the hour at which I should revisit the place of my
birth, wander amidst the shades where my careless infancy had strayed,
recognise objects made sacred to my heart by associations with my
venerable mother and my adorable wife, now illumined with the presence
of my children, and steal a joy, unsuspected and unknown, to which the
very secrecy with which it was ravished would give a tenfold gust.

I embraced the nearest route, by Pampeluna and the Pyrenees, to the
banks of the Garonne. One particular pleasure that I reaped during
this tour, which the climate and scenery might alone have rendered
delightful, consisted in the youthful sensation with which every thing
I saw was enjoyed. Every one who can call to mind the amusements of
his childhood will be conscious that during that period all his senses
were in a tone adapted to convey the most exquisite gratification.
This is not merely, as is vulgarly supposed, the result of the
novelty and freshness with which at that time every thing strikes us.
The extremities of the nerves are in a state of the most delicate
susceptibility, upon which no touch, however slight and evanescent, is
lost, and which makes us, upon every occasion favourable to enjoyment,
gasp and tremble with the pleasure we imbibe. We feel it thrilling
through every pulse, and communicating its tone to every part. Our
attention is engrossed by a single object; or, if we are sensible to
accompanying incidents, it spreads over them an animating sunshine,
and totally varies their appearance and hue. Age, on the contrary,
imperceptibly brings along with it callosity and sluggishness of
sensation, our gratifications are coldly relished, and our desires
feebly awakened. Such is the difference in our perception, of delicious
fruits, of fragrant smells, of smooth and glossy surfaces, of the
vividness of colour, and the heavenly sweetness of sound. If this be a
just account, I leave the reader to imagine how I enjoyed my tour from
Valladolid to the beautiful and romantic retirement of St. Leon.

There was however one sentiment with which I was at this time
impressed, that I shall find it difficult to make the reader understand
in the extent in which I felt it, and that formed a powerful drawback
upon the pleasures I have just described. A short time ago I had been
old; now I was young: I had quaffed of the elixir of immortality. The
revolution this had produced in my sentiments was not less memorable
than that which it had effected in my corporeal lineaments and my
mental elasticity. It is so different a thing to conceive a proposition
theoretically, and to experience it in practice! The case is parallel
to that of the expectation which an ordinary Christian entertains of
eternal bliss. It is an article in his creed; he repeats it every
night when he lies down, and every morning when he rises. He would
be both offended and surprised if you told him he was not persuaded
of it; and yet how faint and indistinct a picture it produces in
his intellectual retina! The affairs of the world strike him with
all the force of vision; to them he cannot make himself a stranger
and a pilgrim; he cannot transfer all his affections to the mere
creature of his imagination, engendered in solitude, and nurtured by
enthusiasm,--heaven. How different must have been the feelings of the
celebrated apostle, who had been taken up into the third heaven, and
had beheld the new Jerusalem with all its jaspers, its chrysolites, its
emeralds, and its sapphires!

My situation was similar to this. I had long known, as far as
reflection could assure me of it, that I possessed the elixir of
immortality. But never till now had I felt the julep tingling in my
veins, and known the effects of it in every joint and articulation
of my frame. I before believed, I now felt, that I was immortal. The
consequence of this intimate persuasion was not without its portion of
melancholy. I still bore the figure and lineaments of a human creature;
but I knew that I was not what I seemed. There was a greater distance
between me and the best constructed and most consummate of the human
species, than there is between him and an ant or a muskito, crushed
by the first accidental tread, or consumed by the first spark wafted
by the wind. I can no longer cheat my fancy; I know that I am alone.
The creature does not exist with whom I have any common language, or
any genuine sympathies. Society is a bitter and galling mockery to my
heart; it only shows in more glaring colours my desolate condition.
The nearer I attempt to draw any of the nominal ties of our nature,
the more they start and shrink from my grasp. From this moment I could
not shake off the terrible impression of my loneliness; no, not for an
hour. Often does this impression induce me to regard my immortality
with loathing indescribable; often do I wish to shelter myself from it
in the sweet oblivion of the grave. From this hour I had no passions,
no interests, no affections; my heart has never expanded with one
natural emotion; I have never delivered myself up to the repose of one
genuine amusement. If at any time I have had a glimpse of pleasure, it
has irritated, only to deceive; it has increased the appetite, while
it displayed in stronger colours my impotence to gratify it. What is
worse, every added year has still subtracted something from the little
poignancy and relish which the bowl of human life continued to retain.
I have the power of assuming a youthful and glossy appearance whenever
I think proper; but this is only a bitter mockery of the furrows
ploughed in my heart. In so much of my adventures as remains for me
to describe, I feel that I shall be obliged to employ the established
terms of human description. I cannot interrupt the history of my
sensations, by a recital of those pangs by which they have been every
moment interrupted. The terms I must use may delude the reader into an
imagination that I still participate of enjoyment and of hope. Be it
so; they may cheat the reader; they cannot cheat myself!

Previously to my arrival in the vicinity of the Garonne, I equipped
myself in the habit of an Armenian, and assumed the character of
a merchant travelling from country to country for the sale of his
commodities.

It was in the close of a wintry day in the bleak and cheerless
month of December, that I first viewed from a distance the turrets
of St. Leon. I procured myself accommodations for the night in the
adjoining village. Being now, after so long an absence, within reach
of the residence of these lovely treasures, I sought, without any
direct consciousness of the sentiment, to delay our interview. When I
entered the little _auberge_, sheltered under a small plantation of
olives, I dreaded to hear the repetition of my family name. I longed
most fervently to be informed of the welfare of my daughters, yet I
could have died sooner than utter a single question on the subject.
I found that that ardent love which had urged me with rapid steps
from Valladolid to St. Leon, gradually, as the distance grew little,
changed from an impetuous vehemence to hear of, and to see them, to
fearful, awe-struck, motionless anxiety. Their light and airy figures,
as I last saw them at Montauban in 1547, danced before the eyes of my
imagination: what casualties, what calamities might not have overtaken
them since! I was afraid almost to breathe, lest I should dissolve
the unreal scene that played around me. How did I know that I did not
indulge this cheerful imagination for the last time? Again and again
in the course of the evening, I felt as if I could have wasted ages in
this _auberge_ and the neighbouring fields, still believing that my
daughters inhabited yonder towers, still hovering round their fancied
residence, but never daring to utter their name, lest it should be
found the prelude to some fatal intelligence. How rich and refined a
repast in some cases is uncertainty! It had the power to impart to
these precious pledges a share of that immortality of which I was the
destined monopolist.

Why had I not the courage never to overpass the limit at which I was
now arrived, and, wherever I afterwards wandered on the various
surface of the globe, still to be able to repeat to myself the
complacent whisper, “I have visited my daughters in their separated
abode, and my visit was productive of none but agreeable sensations?”
My passions were too much afloat to suffer me really to rest in this
patient, contemplative gratification. Before the morning’s dawn, I
walked forth, and turned my eyes towards the castle. I loitered from
bank to bank, and from point to point. Daylight slowly broke in upon
me, but all was silent and quiet in my paternal château. “The family
is not yet stirring,” said I to myself. I turned my steps to the spot
where the ashes of my mother were mingled with their parent earth.
The time that had intervened since her decease, the various fortunes
and impressions I had experienced, had somewhat obliterated the
vividness of her picture in my memory, and deadened the tremblingness
of sensation with which I once thought of her. Yet enough was left,
to make it an interesting moment to me, when I kneeled at her tomb.
Why, oh why, as it had been with my great forefathers, was it not a
moment of exultation to me, when I thus feelingly saluted the shade
of a parent! He that exults in such an hour, must feel that he has
illustrated his birth, and honoured his progenitors. I had done nothing
of this: I was an exile on the face of the earth, had acquired no
trophies, and accumulated no fame. I had none to honour, none even to
know me; I had no family, I had no friend! These bitter recollections
started up in array before me, and cut me to the heart. The spirit of
my mother frowned upon her son; and I returned along the path by which
I came, disgraced and disconsolate.

“I am now,” said I, “in a fit temper to learn intelligence of my
daughters: if they have been unhappy, to hear it will not make me more
forlorn; if they have been fortunate, that knowledge, and that alone,
may revive my courage.” I hastened towards the avenue. I looked into
the thickets and winding paths, as I passed. They communicated to me
mingled pictures of my own boyish days, and of the amusements of the
present inhabitants.

I told the nature of my pretended traffic to the servants of the house,
and proposed an exhibition of my commodities; I was admitted, as I
desired, to the apartment of their mistresses. I saw two young ladies,
who appeared to be respectively about twenty-eight and twenty-four
years of age, and whom without much difficulty I recognised for my
daughters Louisa and Marguerite. Their situation and their ages
identified them; and when afterwards I came to peruse their features
attentively, I could easily discover traits of the amiable young woman
and the playful child they had been when last we parted. I found them
employed upon a piece of embroidery; a comely and respectable looking
young woman, a servant, was sewing in another part of the room. Every
thing about the ladies bespoke the ease of their circumstances, and the
propriety of their sentiments. Both had on an elegant morning-habit;
both had an air of sedateness and sobriety, that to my apprehension
told that they had not lived unchastened by misfortune.

They each slightly looked up, as I was ushered into the apartment; they
saluted me with a graceful and condescending bend of the head, such as
we are accustomed to use to an inferior whom we are willing to put at
his ease. What were my sensations, a father, disguised and unknown,
in the presence of his children! I attempted to stand, as is usual
for a tradesman, when he waits on his customers at their own house. I
attempted to speak. My tongue refused its office; my legs tottered as
if sustaining an unusual weight. Louisa observed me, and desired me to
be seated. I had no power of choice; I accepted her civility. No sooner
was I seated, than in spite of myself a flood of tears gushed from my
eyes. She was astonished; she begged to know if I were indisposed;
she requested me to make use of every assistance the house could
afford. I now found my speech. I apologised for my behaviour; said I
had felt suddenly ill, but that the tears I shed would prove the most
effectual relief to me. My appearance, it may be proper to mention,
was not that of a vulgar pedlar; it was tall, graceful, and ingenuous,
with a certain air of refinement and politeness; my Armenian dress,
though formed of uncostly materials, was such as to display my person
to considerable advantage. Both the young ladies showed themselves
interested in the symptoms of my distress. After a few minutes internal
struggle, I rose, made an excuse for the abruptness of my departure,
and requested permission to repeat my visit in the afternoon, when I
should have something not unimportant to communicate to them.

I had seen two of my daughters; I had been satisfied that they still
existed; I had witnessed their exterior health and beauty. As I
withdrew, I laid my hand upon my heart, and congratulated myself: “Thus
far,” said I, “it is well!” I felt relieved from part of the weight
that lay there. With my right hand I struck upon my forehead: “but, oh,
where,” cried I, “is my other daughter?” The thought came over me with
the force of a demonstration: she is dead! A servant was attending me
to the door; I requested to speak to the housekeeper; I was introduced
to Mariana Chabot. She was struck with my appearance, as I believe my
daughters had been, as if my features were those of some person with
whom she was intimately acquainted. She would probably have mistaken me
for my own son, but that I looked considerably too young. I intreated
her to pardon my curiosity; but, I assured her, I had a particular
reason to interest myself in the family of Monsieur St. Leon, and I
therefore requested that she would have the goodness to inform me of
their affairs, as far as she could with propriety communicate them
to a person who was not so happy as to be in the catalogue of their
acquaintance. I told her that I had just seen two of her ladies, but
that I had understood there had been three, and I particularly desired
some information as to the young lady who had not made her appearance
in the parlour. My presentiment was true; the impression that smote
me when I left the parlour, was her funeral knell; my beloved Julia
was dead; she had been dead four years! If it had not been for the
agitation of my mind when I visited the tomb of my venerable parent,
I should have discovered her monument near that of her grandmother.
That would have been too overwhelming a mode of learning the painful
intelligence; I was glad at least to have escaped that!

In this and some subsequent conversations I held with this respectable
matron, I learned a variety of particulars respecting my daughters.
Madame Chabot expressed herself sorry that she had nothing pleasing
to communicate. Her young ladies had been pursued by a train of
misfortunes, though, heaven knew, they had merited every happiness.
A few years after they had been settled at St. Leon, Julia had been
addressed by a lover in every sense worthy of her. He was rich, noble,
of a gallant spirit, of a cultivated understanding, and a truly kind
and affectionate heart. Their attachment had been long and tried;
habit and experience of each other’s virtues had caused it to take
a deep root. The father of the young man had destined him to marry
the daughter of a duke and peer of the kingdom; but, finding his
affections unalterably fixed, he had at length yielded, and sanctioned
their mutual passion with his consent. Every thing was now prepared
for the nuptials; a day was fixed, and the appointed time was fast
approaching. Just at this juncture, the father changed his mind, and
became more obstinate and inexorable than ever. A report had begun to
be circulated that monsieur St. Leon, the father of the young ladies,
was still alive. Madame Chabot expressed her fear that this report had
originated in some indiscretion of Bernardin, who, however, had always
proved himself a most zealous and faithful servant, and who had since
paid the debt of nature. Be that as it might, the father of the lover
of Julia was found no longer accessible to expostulation or entreaty.
He was of an avaricious disposition, and he regarded the fortune of the
young lady, which would otherwise have been considerable, as entirely
alienated and annihilated by this flaw in the title. But what was
more material, it by no means accorded with his ideas of nobility and
honour, that the father-in-law of his only son should be a fugitive
and a wanderer, with whose residence no one was acquainted, and of
whom no one could tell whether he were living or dead. The manner in
which the ladies had entered into the repossession of their paternal
estate, when minutely investigated, was thought to have something
in it of an ambiguous and unpleasant nature. It was well known that
monsieur St. Leon had left the country in consequence of his having
ruined himself by the vice of gaming. “Surely,” said some, “it is a
little mysterious, how his children came, after an interval of nine
years, to be able to repurchase all he ever possessed.” In short, the
more the old vicomte was reasoned with, the more furious he grew. At
length he made use of the power which the government of France vests
in the father of a family, and shut up his son in one of the royal
prisons. This was a fatal blow both to the chevalier and his mistress.
Disappointed in the object of his warmest affections, maltreated and
disgraced by the severity of a father, his health sensibly declined.
Nothing however could shake the inflexibility of the vicomte; he would
release his son upon no other terms than a renunciation of his love,
terms which the sense of dignity and honour in the young gentleman,
equally with his passion, forbade him to accept. To all representations
of the necessity of granting liberty to his son, if he would not make
himself answerable for his death, the vicomte sternly replied, “that
he preferred his dying to the idea of his connecting himself with a
family of dishonour.” It was not till a few weeks before he expired,
that the father had consented to his release from prison, and had
removed him to one of his castles in a remote province. But the malady
of the chevalier was found incurable; the vital principles of the
system were fatally deranged. The lover died; and the consequences of
this unhappy affair had put a premature close to the existence of the
unfortunate Julia. Madame Chabot added that, the circumstance of this
story having become a subject of public animadversion, it had had a
most unfavourable effect on the prospects of the surviving sisters.
They bore their situation with dignity; but they could not but feel the
unhappy coincidence, which cut them off from the happiest condition of
human life, an honourable and well assorted settlement in marriage.

While madame Chabot related to me the tragical history of Julia, I
felt convulsed with passion, and more than once burst into an agony
of tears. Fatal legacy! atrocious secrets of medicine and chemistry!
every day opened to my astonished and terrified sight a wider prospect
of their wasteful effects! A common degree of penetration might have
shown me, that secrets of this character cut off their possessor from
the dearest ties of human existence, and render him a solitary, cold,
self-centered individual; his heart no longer able to pour itself into
the bosom of a mistress or a friend; his bosom no longer qualified to
receive upon equal terms the overflowing of a kindred heart. But no
mere exercise of imagination, nothing short of the actual experience
through which I had passed, could have adequately represented the
mischiefs of a thousand various names, that issued from this Pandora’s
box, this extract of a universal panacea. I regarded myself as the
murderer of these two lovers, than whom I concluded, from my personal
observation of the one, and all that I heard of the other, two purer
and more affectionate beings, more singularly qualified to form each
other’s happiness, had never existed. I felt as truly haunted with the
ghosts of those I had murdered, as Nero or Caligula might have been;
my wife, my son, my faithful negro; and now, in addition to these,
the tender Julia and her unalterable admirer. I possessed the gift of
immortal life; but I looked on myself as a monster that did not deserve
to exist.

It is with difficulty that I shall be able to make the reader
understand how much more severe the impression of this last catastrophe
was made to me, by the place and time in which I received the
intelligence. We are creatures of sensation: our worst calamities
derive as much of their pungency from the accessories by which they
are accompanied, as they do from their intrinsic evil. If I had heard
this story at any other period, I am persuaded its effects would not
have been half so painful. The idea of my daughters was faded in my
sensorium, and whatever related to them, though really felt, and felt
like a father, would have been felt with a less overpowering interest.

But now I had journeyed from Valladolid to the Garonne to behold them;
I had surveyed the castle they inhabited; I had viewed the garden
which they arranged with their hands; I had entered the parlour which
they adorned with their presence. All this controlled the operation
of absence and of distance; I felt at this moment as if I had been
accustomed to see them every day, and to regard them as inseparable
from my existence. I experienced, as it were, the united effect of
familiarity and novelty; I felt the melancholy fate of Julia, with
all the keenness of an inmate, and all the surprise of a long absent
traveller. The very metamorphosis I had undergone gave new poignancy
to my distress. Madame Chabot tortured me deliberately and at leisure,
without the slightest consciousness of what she was doing; she believed
she was pouring a tale of persons unknown into the ears of a native of
the other hemisphere, at the moment that she was calling up in arms the
strongest and most excruciating feelings of a father for his child. I
on the other hand had the most violent struggle with myself, while I
endeavoured to suppress the appearances of an emotion, which to the
person who witnessed them must have been for ever unaccountable. As it
was, and in spite of all my efforts, madame Chabot betrayed no little
amazement at the agitation with which I listened to a story, in which,
as she apprehended, I could have no personal interest.

What I heard from madame Chabot suggested to me a conduct, which I
resolved to adopt under the present circumstances. In my next interview
I told Louisa that I would now account to her for emotions which, at
the time they occurred, must have appeared somewhat extraordinary. I
owned that I had been acquainted with her father; I said that I had
first met with him in a journey, in which I was then engaged through
the province of Mesopotamia; that I had received from him, though a
stranger, a singular obligation; that a sincere friendship between
us had been the result of this event; that he died about two years
since; that I had attended him in his last moments; that he had charged
me with his dying recommendations and requests; and that my present
journey into France had principally been instigated by a desire to
visit his children. I then delivered into her hands various letters
and papers, which I had counterfeited chiefly with the intention of
supplying my daughters with legal evidence of the decease of their
father.

Louisa listened to what I related with those marks of affection and
sorrow, which are inseparable from the habits of a well constituted
mind. The emotion she discovered led me farther than I first intended.
I was urged by an irresistible impulse to practise, beyond what the
occasion demanded, upon the feelings of her virtuous mind. I know not
whether this is to be considered as a vain refinement and a criminal
curiosity; but--I think--every generous spirit will excuse me, when
it is recollected that this covert and imperfect proceeding was all
that was left me to soothe the impatient cravings of a father’s heart.
From time to time I reminded her of particulars that it was scarcely
possible any one but her father should know; I conjured up past scenes;
I made all the revolutions of her youth pass successively in review
before her; I touched all the pulses of her soul. Sometimes she was
fixed in mute astonishment at the exactness of my information, and
was ready to do me homage as some aerial genius, who condescended to
clothe himself in this earthly figure; at other times astonishment was
swallowed up in feeling, her soul dissolved in tenderness, and she
appeared ready to faint into my arms. It is scarcely possible to depict
the pleasurable sensations I drew from these intercourses; I know not
whether they were entirely innocent; but this I know, that in me they
produced a sentiment of innocence, and a sentiment of paradise. I felt
sometimes as if I could have wasted ages in this sort of gratification.

As the executor of their father, my daughters received me with every
mark of respect; but, after having already protracted my visit to
them for the space of many days, I felt that I should be guilty of
something alike hostile to their decorum and reputation, if I did
not speedily bring it to a termination. I was a person unknown and
almost without a name; nor could it be proper for a young woman to
continue to receive the visits of a person of her own age and a
different sex, upon the intimate and confidential footing upon which
my visits were paid, except in the case of him whom she intends to
make her husband. To considerations of this sort I was obliged to
sacrifice the gratifications in which I had lately been indulging. My
principal concern at St. Leon, from the time in which madame Chabot
had communicated to me the real nature of my daughter’s situation,
was to remove those disadvantages in which my destiny and my errors
had involved them: it would therefore have been the extreme of
inconsistency in me, while I was healing one mischief, to prepare for
them another. It is not indeed probable that I should long have been
contented for myself with this anomalous and neutral situation, in
which I more resembled a piece of furniture endowed with the faculty of
noting the sensations of those around me, than the member of any human
society. It was high time, as I thought, even in this point of view,
that I should put an end to the inglorious scene, should appear in some
real character, and engage in some real undertaking.

Influenced by these considerations, I now quitted the residence of my
daughters. I had satisfied the longing curiosity of a father, had seen
their situation, had witnessed their beauty, their accomplishments, and
their virtues. If I had been afflicted at hearing of the premature fate
of my eldest daughter, if I had been agonised by the reflection that I
might justly regard myself as her murderer, who was so fitted to suffer
this anguish as myself? The outcast of my species, what right had I
to expect to be happy in my own person, or prosperous in any of my
relations? The guilty cause of all this mischief, it was but suitable
that it should be brought home to my own bosom, that it should tear
and distract my own brain! Add to this, I was not without a hope that
my journey would not be found useless to the survivors. By furnishing
to them the proper documents to certify the death of their father, I
flattered myself that I had cut them off more effectually than before
from all connection with my unpropitious destiny, and had placed them
nearly upon a footing with the other noble and unmarried heiresses of
their native country. I have nothing further to relate in regard to
these two amiable and excellent sisters. From the time that I quitted
St. Leon upon this occasion, to the time in which I am now writing,
the opportunity of making further enquiries respecting them has not
occurred to me. If ever it does occur, I have only this one wish to
entertain, which, if granted, will, I am sure, satisfy my fondest
hopes,--May I find they have been as happy, as they so well deserve to
be!

The parting between me and my daughters was not an unaffecting one.
On my part, whose bosom was fraught with a thousand tender feelings,
to which I could give no language, and of which those whom they
principally concerned had not the slightest suspicion, it could not
be unaffecting. Nor did Louisa and her younger sister look with an
indifferent eye upon the bearer of the last sentiments of their father,
the witness of his death, the executor of his will. There was something
in the features of my countenance, a peculiar sort of conformation, a
family resemblance to themselves, which it is probable they did not
advert to, but which I am persuaded wrought within them to the full
extent of the mysterious sympathies of our nature. I pretended to have
been the familiar confident of their father; I told them of things at
which they started and almost blushed to think that any one beyond
the circuit of their dearest relations should have been privy. In the
hour of our separation, they shed many tears, and embraced me with a
warmth that might have well become sisters to a brother. Yet, shall I
confess my weakness, a weakness in which I do not apprehend myself to
be singular? It happens to few men to witness the manner in which the
story of their own deaths is received. If it did, I believe we all of
us have enough of vanity and personal feeling, however sincere a grief
might show itself in the demeanour of survivors, to find it falling
short of our appetites and demand. This I know, I was myself a party
to this unreasonableness. My daughters received the intelligence of
my death with a decorum and sensibility, which in the eyes of every
impartial spectator would have reflected honour on their characters, a
sensibility beyond what could have been imagined in daughters who now
had not seen their father for twelve years. Yet it was an unpleasing
reflection to me, thus to have occasion to gauge their love, and to
say, This is the exact measure of their affection. I remained in this
part of the world long enough to see my children consoled, and myself
forgotten. Self-importance of man, upon how slight a basis do thy
gigantic erections repose!




CHAPTER XXXV.


From St. Leon I proceeded to the kingdom of Hungary. To complete this
journey I must pass through near twenty degrees of longitude. But that
was a trivial consideration: what I most desired was to gain a new
situation, and enter upon an untried scene. I had determined in my next
experiment upon the endowments of the stranger, to make no half-formed
efforts, and to suffer no mischiefs that drew their source from my own
irresolution. I determined, as I have said, to forestall all opposition
by my firmness, and to silence all objectors by the display of a more
than princely magnificence. I thought it therefore eligible to remove
to a scene, where no encounter with any one I had ever known might
abash me, and no relation of any adventure I had ever met should follow
me. The change of my figure, it is true, would render an encounter of
this sort of little moment to my liberty or my reputation; but I was a
new man, and I was desirous to engross and to feel the benefits that
attend upon novelty.

There was another motive however secretly working at my heart, of a
grander and more exalted cast, that made me prefer Hungary to all the
countries of the earth. Hungary had been now, for upwards of a century,
the great frontier of the Christian world,--the theatre upon which
the followers of Mahomet contended against the followers of Jesus for
destruction and for empire. My mind had from time to time brooded
over this picture in the solitude and forlornness of my dungeon. I
ruminated on all the calamities of Hungary, from the battle of Warna in
1444, to the battle of Mohacz in 1526; in both of which this generous
nation had unsuccessfully achieved prodigies of valour, and, even by
their defeats, had protracted the date of their own independence,
and co-operated for the defence of the population and arts of Europe
against a barbarous and blood-delighting foe. My thoughts dwelt with
rapturous admiration upon the exploits of the heroic Huniades and
his greater son. In the course of my many-coloured experience I had
seen something of war, and was not totally unacquainted with its
never-failing consequences. Meditating as I had done in the dungeons
of the inquisition, if ever I recovered my personal liberty and my
freedom of action, a journey into Hungary, my imagination had grown
familiar with captured towns and smoking villages; with the gallant
soldier stretched lifeless on the plain, and the defenceless mother and
her offspring brutally insulted and massacred; with fields laid waste,
and a people lifting up their hands for bread. Determined as I was to
open at once all the stores of my wealth, I thought I could not find
a nobler scene for its display. I resolved to pour the entire stream
of my riches, like a mighty river, to fertilise these wasted plains,
and revive their fainting inhabitants. Thus proceeding, should I not
have a right to expect to find myself guarded by the faithful love
of a people who would be indebted to my beneficence for every breath
they drew? This was the proper scene in which for the possessor of
the philosopher’s stone to take up his abode. He who could feel his
ambition satisfied in a more straitened field would, by so doing, prove
himself unworthy of the mighty blessing.

Nothing occurred to me in my journey of importance enough to obtain a
place in this history. When I arrived, I found the condition of the
inhabitants even more wretched than the lawlessness of my imagination
had represented it. In the battle of Mohacz the last of the line of
their native sovereigns, together with the flower of his nobility,
had fallen a victim to the merciless plague of war. What survived of
eminent persons in the state assembled soon after in national diet, and
elected, as they had been accustomed to do, one of the most illustrious
among themselves to preside over the councils and to conduct the
battles of their country. But the princes of the house of Austria,
ever on the watch for the aggrandisement of their family, seized the
opportunity of their disastrous situation to enslave the Hungarians
to their sceptre. Charles the Fifth caused his brother Ferdinand,
whose consort was only sister to the deceased monarch, to advance his
claim to the vacant throne, and to enter the country with an imperial
army. The native and elected sovereign found himself, in the weakened
condition of his realm, unable to resist the Austrian arms, and was
finally driven to the desperate expedient of calling in the Turk to
his assistance. From this time, for now upwards of thirty years, the
kingdom had been a prey to two foreign invaders, alternately taking
and retaking her most considerable towns, and distributing with the
strictest impartiality the miseries of war to her devoted inhabitants.
Solyman the Magnificent, the present Ottoman emperor, in no long time
threw off the mask; and, like his rival Ferdinand, professed to fight
only for the enlargement of his own dominions; while the claims, the
liberties, the constitution, and the prosperity of Hungary, were alike
trodden under foot in the protracted and sanguinary struggle.

At the period at which I entered this unfortunate realm, the Turk
was in possession of Buda, Gran, Temeswar, and many of the most
considerable cities; and Ferdinand, who had now succeeded Charles
in the imperial dignity, had been obliged to withdraw the seat of
the national government from the first of these towns, the ancient
metropolis, to the comparatively insignificant city of Presburg. The
war between the two parties had more than once been interrupted; not
indeed by the more stable accommodations of a treaty of peace, but by a
truce variously concluded for the terms of six or of eight years. Short
as was the period assigned to the suspension of arms, it was never
suffered to reach its natural termination; but, after the interval of
one or two summers, hostilities did not fail to break out again, with
aggravated symptoms of resentment and animosity. The warfare that was
now carried on had more in it of passion than vigour: it was of little
moment to the interest of either of the princes under whose banners
it was conducted; but it was not on that account the less, but rather
the more, vexatious and distressing to the Hungarian people. It obeyed
no rule; it operated in every direction; no place, no province, no
town,--neither the church nor the palace, neither the cottage nor the
castle,--could assure safety to those who sought its protection. A
flying party, which was to-day in the west, would almost the next day
make its appearance in the eastern extremity of the kingdom. Arts
were neglected; civilisation was destroyed; the stern and haughty
baron, free from restraint, would sally from his castle, sometimes in
pursuit of plunder, sometimes of private resentment and revenge; the
starving peasantry gladly enlisted in the band of a ferocious partisan
for bread; the gangs of robbers, which the vigilant policy of better
times had almost annihilated, rose again in importance, and swelled
into regiments; and, while they assumed at pleasure the denomination
of adherents to Ferdinand or to Solyman, perpetrated every species of
excess with impunity. When a reflecting spectator surveys a country in
a condition like this, he is tempted to wonder that the inhabitants
still retain the courage to bestow on their fields any sort of
cultivation, and that the licensed or the unlicensed robber still finds
something over which to extend the fangs of his rapacity.

I had not long passed the gates of Vienna, before I began to observe
the symptoms of that, which I had come from the Pyrenees and the
Garonne to visit. The farther I advanced, the more melancholy was the
scene I beheld. The country in some places entirely deserted; villages
laid in ashes; cities reduced to the dimensions and insignificance
of villages; fields fertilised or made rank with the manure of human
blood; the roads broken up; the erections of human ingenuity almost
obliterated; mills thrown down; rivers choked up and rendered stagnant;
a few solitary plots of cultivation scattered amidst the mighty waste.
The inhabitants I saw, appeared terrified, sickly, dejected, and
despairing; there was scarcely one who earlier or later had not lost a
father or a brother, whose wife had not been made the victim of brutal
lust, or who had not seen his children butchered before his face.
Persons of the more opulent classes could not travel the country in
safety, without being armed and associated in companies and caravans.
I was myself obliged to obtain the protection of parties of soldiers,
who from time to time happened to be marching in the route I pursued.
The savage neglect into which every thing was declining, produced in
repeated instances a contagious air and pestilential diseases; while
dearth and famine unrelentingly haunted the steps of those whom the
sword and the pestilence had spared. Such is war: such are the evils
nations willingly plunge into, or are compelled to endure, to pamper
the senseless luxury or pride of a Ferdinand and a Solyman!

I proceeded, as I had originally determined to do, to Buda, the
metropolis of the kingdom. It was in the hands of the Turk. It was
of little importance to me whether the monarch of the soil were a
Mahometan or a Christian; my mind was engrossed by considerations of a
very different magnitude. I came to relieve and assist, to the utmost
of my power, the inhabitants of the country in the extremity of their
distress.

I had not proceeded thus far, without bestowing a certain strictness
of reflection on the subject. I easily saw that, if I would confer a
substantial benefit on this unfortunate nation, I had scarcely any
other means for the purpose, than that of reviving among them a spirit
of industry. I was aware that, in the strictness of the term, money was
not wealth; that it could be neither eaten nor drunk; that it would not
of itself either clothe the naked or shelter the houseless; and that it
was unable, but by a circuitous operation, to increase the quantity of
provisions or commodities that the country afforded. It was my business
therefore not to proceed idly in the distribution of gold, but to
meditate seriously my plan of operations.

I fixed myself in a spacious and beautiful mansion in the capital. This
in the present distressed and depopulated condition of Hungary, it was
not difficult to procure. The house I selected had for centuries been
the principal residence of the illustrious family of Ragotski; but the
present representative of that family, after having seen his sons, one
after another, killed in the battles of his country, and his estates
ruined by military depredation, had found himself compelled to fly in
his old age, and had taken refuge with a distant branch of the same
house in the great duchy of Lithuania. It was not necessary for me to
proceed to any great extent in the first instance in the manufacture
of my wealth; I had every facility for adding to my store from time to
time as circumstances should demand.

I determined to open my operations with the article of building. There
was sufficient need of it. One half of the houses, through most of
the districts of Lower, or Western Hungary in particular, were ruined
and untenantable. I did not begin with erecting palaces; I felt that
the first claimants in the present emergency were the peasant and the
cultivator. I was more desirous that the rustic than the prince should
be well lodged and accommodated, provided with the means of rest after
fatigue, and secured against the invasion of ungenial seasons.

My reasons for beginning with building were these:--It was my purpose
to stimulate and revive the industry of the nation: I was desirous of
doing this with the least practicable violence upon the inclinations
and freedom of the inhabitants. Had I required of those to whom I
addressed myself, that they should fertilise the earth, the seeds with
which it should be impregnated might be wanting: I should have a nice
balance to adjust between what was necessary for immediate subsistence,
and what might be applied as the basis of future; a point better left
to its spontaneous level: I might be impeded and controlled by a
thousand circumstances and at every step. But the materials of building
are to be found in every country; no seasons can impair, no malignity
of man can annihilate them. Wherever there are quarries, there is
stone; wherever there is clay, there are the means of manufacturing
bricks. I was anxious to leave the rest of the great process of human
accommodation to its course. While I employed labourers, and paid
them their wages, there would be, in the mildest and most salutary
mode, a continual influx of money into the market. The increase of the
precious metals would give new alacrity to the operations of traffic;
the buyers would come forward with double confidence; the venders
would be eager to meet the activity and spirit of the demand. Ardour
and hope would revisit the human mind; and the industry I created,
and the accommodations of one kind at least to which I gave birth,
would inoculate the other departments of the community with a similar
industry. I came into Hungary in the spring of 1560; the season
was favourable to seeding and cultivation; I seemed to enter on my
undertaking with the happiest auspices.

Some time however must necessarily elapse between the period of
impregnating the soil, and that of the future harvest. Though I laid
it down therefore as a law to myself, to commit the least practicable
violence upon the genuine action of human society in pursuit of
the means of subsistence, I thought proper in a certain degree to
engage in the importation of corn from Poland, Silesia, and other
neighbouring countries. This seemed an eligible measure, if it were
only that I might show others the way, and excite them by my example.
I procured agents; I extended my concerns in various directions
over the navigable rivers; I formed magazines. It would have been
contrary to the genius of my undertaking, either to make a gratuitous
distribution of what I purchased, or to sell it at such low prices as
to drive other speculators, whose spirit of enterprise might happily
co-operate with mine, out of the market. However indifferent I might
feel to the receipt of pecuniary compensation, it was necessary that,
in the concerns of barter and trade, I should assume the exterior of a
merchant.

Nor did I wholly confine my exertions within the occupations of an
architect and a corn-dealer. These, or rather the former of the two,
I regarded as my true and genuine province; but I did not so far
enslave myself to my own maxims, as to negative in all instances the
direct demands of want. I was not anxious to convert a nation or an
army of men into my personal adherents and retainers: I was rather
desirous to avoid this as a dangerous source of obloquy. I did not
therefore always decline, by pretended loans to assist other men to
employ labourers as well as myself, to act upon their own designs, and
prosecute their own fortune. The cries of the poor man, the widow, and
the orphan, were sometimes too importunate, and too well justified by
their unquestionable necessities, to allow me to withhold from them my
alms. In a few instances I conveyed my supplies anonymously to persons,
whose dignity of birth or whose proud independence would have been too
grievously wounded if they had known their benefactor. I was cautious
and apprehensive as to the direct dispensing of money, but not entirely
bent against it; I regarded it as a precarious, but in some cases a
necessary interference.

The impulse which, by these various measures, I was fortunate enough
to generate, seemed to have the effect, so far at least as the
sphere of my activity extended, to revive the almost expiring life
of the country. Dejection and hopeless indolence, when I commenced
my operations, were written in every face; the miserable inhabitants
crawled along the roads or the street, their hands idly relaxed by
their side, and their slow and painful steps scarcely supporting their
lifeless trunk. When my plan became known, and I had already in a few
instances reduced my maxims into practice, it was as if the mellow
and spirit-stirring blast of a trumpet had wakened their sleeping
souls. Their eyes lightened with intelligence; the tear of anguish was
wiped from their faded cheeks; the smile of hope slowly expelled, and
faintly succeeded to, the bitter expression of despair. Busy and active
thoughts gave new motion to their limbs and quickness to their steps;
the labourer was seen hastening from place to place; the sound of the
hammer, the saw, and the various tools of the workman, was to be heard
from every side.

The conduct I pursued necessarily fixed upon me a considerable portion
of public attention. I was a foreigner, destitute of connections, and
having no previous acquaintance with any individual in the country. I
was in appearance a mere boy, a young man in all the flower and bloom
of adolescence, and who must be supposed to have just entered into
possession of his patrimony. These things tended to increase the public
wonder, and to render the mystery of my proceedings more perplexing
and obscure. In the age of genial warmth and melting softness, I did
not appear accessible to those passions which haunt the days, and
too often undermine the virtues, of youth. Youth is the season of
benevolence; but benevolence is rarely, as seemed to be my case, the
only fruit that youth is found to produce. There was a maturity and a
justness of adaptation in my plans, not less foreign from what those
who surrounded me would have expected me to display. The apparent
disinterestedness and modesty of my proceedings were not lost upon
the spectators. The consequence of all this was, that the sieur de
Chatillon, such was the name I at this time assumed, was regarded as a
phenomenon which could not be too much admired, or too loudly extolled.
Wherever I appeared, the people followed me with their gratitude and
blessings; ballads were written in my praise; the very children were
taught with their infant tongues to lisp the virtues of the saviour of
Hungary. My doors were besieged; my steps were watched; I could move
no where without public observation. I was importuned with petitions
without end; yet, if any petitioner showed himself presumptuous and
intrusive, the whole multitude of bystanders was ready to repress his
indiscretion, and teach him the respect that was due to their generous
benefactor, who never refused any thing, but what it would be improper
and injurious to grant.

Such was the treatment I experienced in Buda and the neighbouring
districts. Whether I looked within or without, I was equally
presented with incitements to self-approbation. I sent forth labour,
accompanied with her best and loveliest companions, plenty and health,
congratulation and contentment, to scatter blessings through the land.
I felt that I was prompted to this conduct by none of the motives of
vulgar ambition. I desired neither lordships nor estates, neither
elevation of rank, nor extension of prerogative. Sufficient to myself,
if I effected the happiness of the people, and they confessed me their
benefactor, my every passion would then be gratified. The utmost
boundary of my personal wishes proceeded no farther than this, that I
might be honoured and loved. What I desired, I obtained; the youth I
had procured to myself through the medium of the _opus magnum_, was
like what we are told of the youth of Job:--“When I went out through
the gate of the city, the young men saw me and hid themselves, and the
aged arose and stood up; the nobles refrained from talking, and the
princes laid their hands upon their mouths. When the ear heard me, then
it blessed me; and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to my actions.”

Here it may be thought I had ascended to that sphere which it was fit
the possessor of the philosopher’s stone should fill, and reaped the
rewards to which a man thus endowed ought to be forward to entitle
himself. Nor will I affirm that I was insensible to the gratifications
of my present situation. Though I sought to escape from the applause
that pursued me, yet there is something in the nature of the human
mind, that makes it impossible for us to hear it without complacence.
It was not however a boisterous and obtrusive acclamation that
satisfied me. A certain inwrought modesty of nature made me listen to
noisy commendations with a sentiment of shame. They seemed to be more
than any thing I had done could deserve; or they seemed to be in a tone
from which the delicacy of a virtuous mind shrinks back displeased.
They were so obstreperous, as to take from me the power of hearing the
sweeter verdict of my own conscience. No; it was the unbidden tear that
glistened in the eye of my beneficiaries; the tongue that faltered
beneath the essays of gratitude; the overwhelmed heart that had no
power to express itself; the hand of the parent that was stretched out
to his children, and dumbly said, These, these shall thank you!--it
was these things, that I felt within as the balsam of my life, and the
ambrosia of heaven.




CHAPTER XXXVI.


Yet, thus surrounded, and regaled with this animated praise, I was
not content; I wanted a friend. I was alone amidst the innumerable
multitudes of those I had blessed. I knew no cordiality; I could repose
no confidence; I could find no equal. I was like a God, who dispenses
his bounties profusely through twenty climates, but who at the same
time sits, separate, elevated, and alone, in the highest heaven. The
reader may, if he pleases, despise me for the confession; but I felt
that I was not formed for the happiness of a God.

I was not however long sufficiently at leisure, thus to refine upon
the deficiencies of my situation. I had engaged in a task of extreme
delicacy, in which the smallest failure would draw along with it the
most serious consequences. Mine was not an undertaking that had for
its object, to supply those around me with luxuries, or to augment the
stock of their cheerful relaxations and amusements; the very existence
of my beneficiaries depended on its success. I had put myself in a
considerable degree, with whatever diffidence and caution, in the room
of the course of nature, and had taken the administration of the common
benefits of human society into my hands. The populace are ever ready to
construe this delegation in the strictest sense: unqualified to trace
the wheels and combinations of the great machine, if prosperity is
their lot, they willingly ascribe it to their protectors and governors;
and if they are unfortunate, it is against them that the storm of their
resentment is directed. The moment they are thus irritated, their
impatience is too great to admit of correctives and remedies; in the
fury of their disappointment, they disturb every thing, and render that
irreparable and fatal, which was at first only doubtful and unpromising.

My proceedings, as I have already said, bore in the commencement the
most benignant face, and seemed a revival of this despairing and
unfortunate nation little less than miraculous. The regular labours
in which the inhabitants became engaged, restored a healthful tone
to their minds; the payments they duly received seemed to discharge
them from all anxious solicitude; and, as by my own efforts and the
enterprises of others, the market was supplied with provisions, they
had no difficulty in exchanging these payments for the necessaries
of life. The supply of the market at first was easy; the universal
dejection that preceded, though it had not prevented all exertions for
that purpose, had rendered those exertions too feeble for extensive
success. The strenuous efforts that were now made were productive of
a copious supply; but they rendered each importation more difficult
than the importation before. The demand continued the same; the relief
was every day more diminutive and precarious. The harvest was however
advancing with the happiest auspices: and, though some time must yet
be consumed in expectation, it was probable frugality and fortitude
might enable the inhabitants to hold out till the season of plenty
should arrive.

But fortitude is not the virtue of a populace. The higher had been
their hopes, and the more unexpected their deliverance, with so much
the more blank and melancholy a countenance they beheld this unexpected
delay and retrogression. Not understanding the powers by which I acted,
they blindly ascribed to me the faculty of doing whatever I pleased.
As long as every thing went on prosperously, they were grateful; the
moment a reverse occurred, they were inclined to murmur. They made no
allowance for the limited capacities of a human creature: they imputed
whatever was unpleasing to indifference or ill will. The price of
commodities, after having for a while become moderate, now rapidly
rose again: this was partly the consequence of the increased quantity
of the precious metals, by means of which any assignable sum bore
a less proportion to the provisions of the market than it had done
before. Bread was at a very high price; and it occasionally happened
to buyers who did not come early enough, that there was no bread to be
purchased. The doors of the houses where it was sold, were besieged;
the industrious poor appeared before them with the first faint dawn of
the morning’s light. Here they consumed hours of painful expectation,
in grievous addition to the hours of their customary fatigue. The
whole was a scene of anguish and calamity; the passions of those who
composed it, mingled with the distress, and rendered it too heavy to
be borne. Anticipating famine, they felt the mischiefs of it before it
arrived. Never was the demand so urgent; it seemed as if the capacity
of men’s appetites was enlarged, and the cravings of hunger became more
insatiable, in proportion to the smallness of the supply. To people
thus circumstanced, it would have been vain to recommend frugality and
moderation. They devoured the food with their eyes, while it was yet
beyond the reach of their hands; and the lesson you read them, would
have sounded in their ears as if you had bid them die to-day, to escape
the danger of dying to-morrow.

The crowds which the necessity of purchasing bread brought together at
certain hours, when assembled, naturally entered into the discussion
of their present discontents. They were not satisfied with the
discourse and jostling of the morning; the habits produced by these
noisy assemblies had a secret charm with them, and drew them together
at seasons of less urgent demand. They patroled the streets: they
were loud in the expressions of their dissatisfaction. With the
inconsequence incident to the lower orders of mankind, they threatened
to destroy the mills, the markets, the places of sale, the means and
materials by which their wants were to be supplied.

In the midst of these scenes of tumult and confusion, it is not to be
imagined that I escaped uncensured. Far otherwise: in proportion to the
gratitude and adoration with which they had lately regarded me, were
their detestation and abhorrence now. My interference was spoken of
with contempt and execration. For what purpose had I, a foreigner, come
into their country, and intruded myself into their affairs? Why had I
impiously taken them out of the hands of their heavenly Father, whose
care was so constant, and whose relief so certain? It was on my part
a despicable vanity and presumption, which the justice of Providence
could not fail to avenge; and they must now suffer the punishment
of my blasphemy. But they did not stop here. There was no horrible
calumny which they did not invent, or give credit to, against me. They
imputed to me the basest personal motives for what I had done. Under
the hypocritical pretence, they cried, of being their benefactor and
saviour, I was using them only for my private ends. I had become a
purchaser and vender of corn, for the single purpose of increasing my
fortune. The present scarcity, they were well assured, was artificial,
and of my own contriving. I had magazines in different stations on
the borders, which, when the price was risen to the standard of my
avarice, and when half the people had fallen victims to my inhumanity,
I purposed to dispose of to an immense profit.

Such were the aspersions to which my character became generally
exposed. By the populace, who now experienced the unsatisfied cravings
of hunger, and in whom my proceedings had excited hope, only to be
followed by a more cruel disappointment, they were greedily credited.
Many who knew their falsehood, were yet zealous to propagate them.
Short as had been my residence in Hungary, I had made many enemies. It
is to be feared that no man can be assiduous and indefatigable in the
service of others, without incurring that consequence. I employed a
great number of workmen; every one whom for whatever reason I refused
to employ, every one who, being unqualified for the service I required,
looked with an envious eye on the better fortune of his neighbour,
was well disposed to be my enemy. Persons of no contemptible account
in the community had been excited by expectations of profit to engage
in the importation of corn: these persons viewed my efforts in the
same department with a suspicious eye, and regarded a man who, however
cautious in his proceedings, was not regulated by the same motive, as
a most pernicious rival. My sudden elevation and importance in the
country were viewed with not more astonishment than aversion by those
whose importance I obscured. They could not hear with patience of an
upstart, a boy, a stranger, one universally unknown, elbowing out
the influence of all that was most illustrious and venerable in the
community, and robbing them daily of their adherents and retainers. All
these persons left no effort untried to defame my character.

The impulse once given, the turbulent disposition of the populace
became every day more formidable. It is much easier to disseminate
a temper of this sort than to quell it: my opulent foes might take
alarm at its excesses, and desire to undo what they had done; but it
was beyond their power. Every day I feared lest, from threats and
invectives, the populace should proceed to violence: every night I
thought I had reason to congratulate myself, that the day had passed
without waste and spoil committed by them on the means of their
subsistence, or was not marked with the destruction of their champion
and benefactor. In some places a sort of petty sedition broke out
among the labourers I employed: in the morning they refused to work:
why should a man work, they muttered, when after all he may starve
with the wages of his labour in his possession? At night they became
impatient and furious, and demanded from my superintendents and
storehouse-men the food, which in the morning they had refused to earn,
and were therefore now unable to purchase. I had already had some
experience in the nature of popular tumults; I had now no marchese
Filosanto at hand to persuade me of their inefficacy; and, if I had,
I should no longer have lent an ear to his serene and unsuspicious
generosity. I felt the reality of the danger; I saw the storm as it
blackened in my horizon, and was deeply convinced what it would be if
it burst upon my head.

It may be imagined with what feelings I viewed my whole design on the
point to be subverted, by the unruliness of those for whose benefit
it had been planned. It is true I had now no darling relations to be
involved in my fate, no incomparable wife, no daughters illustrious in
innocence and beauty; yet my feelings were scarcely less pungent than
they had been at the period of my catastrophe at Pisa. I had blamed
myself in review, that, in my experiments at Constance, at Dresden,
at Pisa, and at Madrid, I had not commenced upon a sufficiently ample
scale, but had suffered myself to be frustrated by the ingloriousness
of my precautions. That had not been my error in the present instance;
yet my success now promised to be scarcely more flattering than upon
former occasions. I had looked for happiness as the result of the
benevolence and philanthropy I was exerting; I found only anxiety and a
well grounded fear even for my personal safety. Let no man build on the
expected gratitude of those he spends his strength to serve! Let him be
beneficent if he will; but let him not depend for his happiness on the
conviction of his rectitude and virtue that is to be impressed on the
minds of others! There is a principle in the human breast, that easily
induces them to regard every thing that can be done for them, as no
more than their due, and speedily discharges them from the oppressive
consciousness of obligation. There is a levity in the generality of
men, that entails on them a continual oblivion of past benefits, and
makes one recent disappointment of more importance in their eyes than
an eternity of kindnesses and condescension. I shall have other
instances of ingratitude to display in what yet remains to be related
of my story.

My nights were restless; my thoughts were in arms. What was it that it
became me to do in the present emergency? Sometimes, in the bitterness
of my heart, hating myself, hating the endowments of the stranger,
hating a race of beings who denied all credit to the most unheard-of
exertions for their advantage, I determined to withdraw unobserved
from my attendants and clients, and bid adieu to Hungary for ever. But
whither was I to fly? What was I to do next? What experiment could I
make of the purposes to which to apply the philosopher’s stone, that I
had not already made? These questions, to none of which I could give a
satisfactory answer, checked the career of my passion, and gave pause
to my thoughts.

Whatever I did, I was determined to do nothing rashly, nor to quit
a great experiment without its having been fully tried. It was no
light concern, no trivial child’s-play, in which I had embarked. I
had taken the welfare, perhaps the existence, of a great and heroic
nation under my protection. In this glorious vocation it did not
become me to be lightly discouraged. What if those I served and saved
did not show themselves sufficiently sensible to the exertions I made
for them? I ought to purify my bosom, on an occasion like this, from
base and ignoble motives, and to deem myself sufficiently recompensed
by my conscious virtue. What if the service in which I had engaged
now appeared to be a service of hazard and peril? Is there any great
undertaking that can be separated from this condition? If hastily,
from cowardice, from pique, or from any other motive, I deserted the
business on which I had entered, what was to become of my mistaken
indeed, but in that case most unfortunate clients? The greater was the
crisis to which they were exposed, the more were unremitted vigilance
and uncommon powers necessary to guide them amidst its rocks and its
quicksands. I saw thousands of men who for several weeks had fed, as it
were, from the stores of my bounty. By a propensity inseparable from
the human heart, I became attached to the work of my meditations, and
the labour of my thoughts. All their fickleness, their injustice, even
the atrocious calumnies they admitted and propagated against me, could
not wean my attachment from beings, a great portion of whom, but for my
interference, would, I believed, long ere this have expired of hunger.

In the peculiar and urgent circumstances in which I found myself, no
expedient was so obvious as that of calling in the interference of the
government under which I lived. It was necessary that the resources
of national subsistence should be defended from the wanton spoil of
those who, when they were annihilated, must inevitably perish. It was
necessary that the benefactor of Hungary, who, I flattered myself, was
still able to watch effectively for her advantage, should be protected
from her misguided resentment. The alternative was singularly painful
to my feelings. The pride with which my unparalleled endowments
inspired me, was deeply wounded, when I was compelled to confess that
I was not alone equal to the task I had undertaken, and that I must
submit to call in a foreign auxiliary. I augured little favourable from
the interference of government, which, if I implored, I could scarcely
expect to guide, which was not likely to submit to my principle of
rendering its interference the mildest and smallest that the nature of
the case would admit; but, puffed up with presumption, and intoxicated
with authority, would probably leave no concern of the public welfare
uninvaded. Least of all, could I anticipate much of good from a Turkish
government. But what could I do? I could discover no other expedient.
Influenced by the views I have recited, I had hitherto kept myself as
far from the observation of the political directors of the state as
I could. But my cautiousness and reserve were now at an end. With my
eyes open I exposed myself to all the evils that might attend on my
proceeding.

I determined to apply to the bashaw of the province. Previously to my
taking this step, I had the precaution to enquire his character. He
was the genuine offspring of the Turkish system of government. His
name was Muzaffer Bey. He was originally a Circassian slave; then a
Janissary; and, rising by insensible gradation, had at length been
appointed bashaw of Buda, which, as being the immediate frontier
between Austria and the Porte, was at this time the most arduous
situation in the gift of the sultan. He was esteemed a good soldier; he
had been early distinguished by his dexterity in military exercises;
he had since seen much service; and, in every situation in which he
was placed, had earned commendation and honour. He was abstemious and
hardy; for himself, he neither pampered his appetites nor shrunk from
severity; and he had as little indulgence for those under his command
as for his own person. Yet he was indebted for his present eminence
more to the arts of the courtier, than to his merits in the field.
His chief care had ever been to recommend himself to those above him,
and to obtain the good will of his equals; for the opinion of his
inferiors he gave himself little concern. With considerable ability, he
laboured under no check from either principle or ingenuous pride; and
therefore was extremely successful in his attacks on the inclination
of those he sought. The habits of his mind had modified the lines of
his countenance and the tones of his voice. Except to his dependants
and the poor he almost always spoke with a smile upon his face, and
his enunciation was silver-tongued, oily, copious, and insinuating.
If he ever adopted a different manner, the variation was only in the
means not the end; and, when he seemed to travel by an opposite road,
the goal at which he aimed was the same. He never consulted any oracle
but that of his apparent interest; if he had any insolence in his
nature, he regarded his slaves and those under his military command as
affording a sufficient sphere for its exercise; he had no affections to
disturb him from his bent; he had no passions but the self-complacency
of superior cunning, and the sordid love of pelf.

This account of the man with whom I had to deal was far from
encouraging; but I had no alternative. I sent to signify my desire to
confer with him; or, to speak more accurately, to ask, in the Eastern
manner when it would be agreeable to him to receive a present of which
I requested his acceptance. He appointed the morning of the following
day. I prepared a gift, such as might tend to conciliate his favour,
without marking in the donor the possession of immoderate wealth.
It consisted of silks and muslins, with a small piece of plate of
exquisite workmanship. My present was borne by two of my servants.
We were ushered to the bashaw in his private apartment; there were
two or three persons in attendance upon him. They examined my present
together; and, without condescending to express much approbation, I
could nevertheless discern that the bashaw was pleased with it. This
ceremony concluded; Muzaffer ordered what I had brought to be taken
into a different apartment; and, every other person withdrawing, we
were left alone.

While the bashaw was examining my gift, I took the opportunity of
considering his person. He appeared to be about sixty years of age;
his complexion dark and muddy; his features coarse and distorted; his
mustachoes remarkably large; his person, though bony and muscular,
considerably below the middle size; and his figure ungainly and
ungraceful. I felt surprised that such a man should ever have been an
excellent soldier, or have risen from a low rank to one of the first
situations of the empire. To look at him, he seemed better formed for
the vice of a comedy, than the ruler of a nation. He raised his eyes
towards me askance, as he sat leaning on his elbow, and said,

“You call yourself--?”

“The sieur de Chatillon.”

“And your age--?”

“Is two and twenty.”

“I am glad you are come to me. I intended to have sent for you, and you
have saved me the trouble.”

I made many apologies for my intrusion, but added that I had a petition
to prefer, and I hoped he would favour me with a hearing.

“Not at all, not at all; do not call it an intrusion: it is necessary I
should be acquainted with you.” He proceeded:--

“You have undertaken to confer great benefits on the subjects of
the grand signior, my master; to rescue them from famine. Young,
rich, a stranger, unknown to my master, unknown to his subjects, I
understand that you have spared no labour or expense to bring about
their welfare. This is really a very extraordinary case; your merit is
unprecedented; I do not feel myself competent to reward it.”

I answered that I laid no claim to uncommon merit; that every temper
had its particular gratifications; and that I found as real a luxury in
the proceedings he had remarked, as other men did in the excesses of
the table, or the promiscuous enjoyments of the harem.

“It is out of my power,” continued he, “to remunerate you as you
deserve; I must send you to Constantinople.”

I perceived that this was the first essay of his artifice. I informed
him which I have no doubt he knew well enough before, that I had no
desire to go to Constantinople. I wished to remain where I was, and to
finish what I had begun.

“What, you have not done then?” suddenly and with an abrupt voice
exclaimed the bashaw. “By Mahomet, a man of a reasonable appetite in
your place might be satisfied. Have not you filled the streets with
riots, and the country with rebellion? Do not the populace assemble in
crowds, insulting every one they meet, and talking of nothing but fire
and devastation, the bowstring and the cimeter? Be so good, my dear
sir; as to inform me what further you may have in view?”

“Reverend bashaw,” cried I with submission, yet with firmness, “I have
none of these things in view. But a moment ago you did justice to my
intentions. They are those of beneficence, and beneficence only.”

“I know nothing about that. I have nothing to do with honest men’s
blunders; I look to the effects they produce.”

“These effects, most mighty sir, are temporary; they are the clouds
that will often obscure for an instant the brightest sunshine.
Condescend to lend me your generous assistance, and all will be well.”

“Do not tell me of clouds and sunshine. This is, to my thinking, not an
April shower, but an earthquake and a hurricane. If we are all to be
swallowed up or whirled into the air, it is no consolation to me, that
the day after we are gone, every thing shall be as fair and serene as
paradise itself.”

“Remember, sir, that when I came into Hungary, I found its inhabitants
in the most desperate condition, miserable, wasted and starving. Have I
not already suspended this evil for months?”

“Yes, I do remember. You are one of those busy-bodies, who never see an
evil without imagining they are the persons to correct it, intruding
into every thing, and subverting every thing. The superintendence
of the public welfare is a mystery to which none are competent, but
those whom Mahomet has raised to the situation of statesmen. Your
interference is blasphemy against the spirit of our religion, and
deserves to be encountered with the most exemplary punishment.”

“Good God! then, is it in this country a crime to feed the hungry, to
clothe the naked, and shelter the houseless?”

“Sieur de Chatillon,” retorted the bashaw, “you appear to be
unacquainted with the maxims of Turkish policy, the wisest and most
beneficent in the world. If none of the disturbances had happened at
which I have so much reason to be alarmed, still, in relieving the
people in the manner you have done, you have incurred the guilt of
high treason against the sultan. Know, sir, that, through the whole
extent of his dominions, there is but one proprietor, and that is our
illustrious monarch. You say, that you wish to be the benefactor of
his subjects, and the judge of your own proceedings: such sentiments
are direct rebellion against the glorious constitution of Ottoman. The
sovereign of Constantinople will have no benefactor in the countries he
presides over, but himself. Like the invisible ruler of the universe,
he acts by second causes; he allows his ministers to be the instruments
of his beneficence; but all must be ascribed to him, must flow from
his will, and be placed under his control. You, who have formed a
plan of public benefit without consulting him, and have presumed,
like a luminary of the world, to move in an orbit of your own, have
in strictness of construction forfeited your life to his justice; and
I consult rather the clemency of his nature than the maxims of his
policy, if I suffer you to go from this palace with your head upon your
shoulders.”

Without permitting myself to be too much moved by the imperious
language addressed to me, I complained to the bashaw of the rigorous
and arbitrary character of what he stated to be the maxims of the
Turkish government. I solemnly protested that I had no private or
personal object in view. The effect of my operations would be to
give new strength and energy to his master’s dominions. By diffusing
happiness among his subjects, by reviving industry, and scattering
plenty, prosperity, and ease, all disaffection would be rooted out;
and the people, who are never minute in scanning the cause of their
enjoyments, would bless the sceptre under which they were made to
participate such manifold benefits. If the policy of the divan led them
in any degree to interfere, they ought rather to crown my measures with
their applause, than wantonly to throw obstacles in the way of what I
purposed. I asked however no reward, I demanded no favour for myself;
all I desired was that the sultan would assist me in securing to his
people those benefits, the dissemination of which I had so auspiciously
begun.

The bashaw, without taking any direct notice of this expostulation,
answered, that I was not aware of the maxims of his government, to
which, in consideration of my seeming generosity and rectitude, he
was willing to give the mildest interpretation. “It is however,”
continued he, “to the last degree idle in you to imagine, that you
can be permitted to go on unobserved, and that the sultan and his
representatives are to take no account of your proceeding. The great
instrument for ruling mankind is by their passions and their opinions.
The man from whom they believe they have the most to fear and the most
to hope, will always be their master. Whatever be your secret or your
professed designs, you go on from day to day making yourself partisans,
and enlisting the subjects of the sultan among your personal retainers.
What security has he for your submission and loyalty? How shall he know
that, when you have acquired the advantages of a powerful leader, you
will not go over to the enemy, or, in the present distracted condition
of the province, even have the audacity to set up for yourself? If
therefore, by an unexampled clemency of construction, I decline to
reduce you into the passive machine of my master’s will, it is at least
incumbent on me, that I should take account of your powers, and possess
myself of the schedule of your property. By this means only can I
watch your progress, and take care that you do not suddenly become too
powerful for a subject. Are you prepared to satisfy me on this head?”

On this question I hesitated for a moment; I had not exactly
anticipated the enquiry; at length I requested the delay of a few days,
and then I promised that all his demands should be satisfied. The
bashaw resumed:--

“Sieur de Chatillon, I remark your hesitation, and I draw from it
no favourable augury. These indirect and involuntary indications
are more worthy of my attention than all the studied and elaborate
information you shall think proper to give me. Sir, you are a man of
darkness, and every thing that relates to you is enveloped in mystery.
You come hither with no apparent motive; you have no connections of
blood in Hungary; you have no acquaintance with any eminent person
of the Hungarian nation. I have had my spies on you, though I have
not hitherto thought proper to summon you to my presence. You have
purchased no property in the province; I cannot learn that you have
any correspondences or resources from abroad. I have been at the pains
to procure an account of your expenditure during the three months you
have resided among us; much of that expenditure has been obscure,
clandestine, and indirect; but I believe you will find my estimate,
which you are at liberty to inspect and remark upon, tolerably correct.
Your disbursements for three months, exceed the amount of two years’
income of the richest subject that even the credulous monarchs of
Christendom suffer within their dominions. What am I to think of this?
How can I be sufficiently vigilant respecting a man, whose expenditure
is immense, and whose wealth can neither be traced to its source, nor
ascertained in its amount?”

I was not slow in conjecturing the result which the bashaw proposed to
himself from our present conference. I was confirmed in my conjecture
by the circumstance of his choosing that the discussion between us
should be apart from all witnesses. He regarded me as a boy, and had
therefore practised upon me all those arts which might most effectually
excite in me fear and alarm. He found however that, under the external
indications of youth and inexperience, I possessed the wariness that
added years most powerfully inculcate, and the self-possession of a
mind thoroughly awake to its situation and its resources. This must
have been to the minister before whom I stood a memorable phenomenon.
But curiosity is not a Turkish passion; and the single object of the
bashaw in the present instance, was to make the mysteriousness of
my circumstances a pretext for extorting money. I submitted with as
little seeming reluctance as possible to the necessity of the case;
I requested the good offices of Muzaffer to protect my benefactions;
and begged permission to make him the compliment of a handsome sum of
money, by way of convincing him that I was worthy of his friendship.

This business was easily adjusted between us. I found him perfectly
skilled in the duties of a public office, and by no means under the
dominion of visionary scruples. He told me he was now convinced that I
was a well meaning man, and a good subject; he said, that nothing could
tend more effectually to demonstrate my innocence, than my showing
that I understood the duties and concerns of a minister of state; and
that for his own part he was never so happy, as when he was thus able
to reconcile his private interests with the good and faithful service
of his master. There was nothing that demanded a more unremitted
vigilance, or a more skilful management, than such a situation as
his; and it would be most unreasonable, either in the sovereign that
appointed him, or the subjects over whom he was placed, to expect him
to be indifferent to the emoluments and perquisites of his function.
He complimented me warmly upon the disinterestedness and liberality of
my exertions. He thought himself particularly fortunate in having so
public-spirited an individual within the circuit of his jurisdiction.
In fine, he hoped he should be honoured with my personal acquaintance,
and assured me that nothing could make him more happy than the
frequent repetition of my visits.

We now perfectly understood one another; and it was apparent that I had
to do with a man, who, for what he deemed an adequate consideration,
would willingly lend me the authority and countenance of his office,
and suffer me to guide him in any of the functions I might conceive
necessary for the execution of my projects. Guards were agreed to be
placed upon the magazines where corn was still contained, and from
place to place on the banks of the rivers, where the depredations
of a misguided populace were most to be apprehended. Finding the
bashaw so perfectly willing to comply with my requisitions, I further
obtained from him the direction of several squadrons of cavalry
for the protection of the crops, which from the consequences of my
interference now began on all sides to variegate the scene. This was
a most important service. When the corn was first committed to the
earth, it was out of the reach of military devastation. But, as time
glided silently on, the case became materially altered; the enemy might
from forecast desire to reap the harvest of what he had not sown, or
from malice to destroy that without which the Turk would perhaps be
unable to retain his newly acquired territory. This had in reality
been the principal cause, before my arrival in Hungary, of the very
general neglect into which agriculture had fallen. Muzaffer, than whom
no person could now be more polite and condescending, allowed me to
determine the number and nature of the troops I required; and added
that, though he could not openly put them under my direction, the
slightest intimation I might think proper to convey to him, should at
any time decide their march, and regulate their quarters.




CHAPTER XXXVII.


In my conference with the bashaw I may seem to have secured more than
one point of material importance; yet it was difficult for any man to
be in a state less consolatory or more full of danger and menace, than
I was at this moment. By my vigilance and the power which thus I had
acquired, I prevented indeed the inhabitants from wantonly destroying
the means of their own subsistence; but, the more I was their
benefactor, the more I appeared to become odious to their thoughts.
My negotiation with the bashaw, whatever other benefit might accrue
from it, did not tend to increase the resources of the country; I was
obliged to witness many scenes of wretchedness. He that would assist
mankind in their adversity, must harden his heart to be the spectator
of the distress that he can, and that he cannot, relieve. But whatever
I beheld of this sort, the majority of the bystanders obstinately
persisted to ascribe to my deliberate malignity. The military aid I
found myself necessitated to introduce by no means tended to disarm
the prejudices of my clients. In one or two instances, but no more,
slight tumults arose, and a few of the rioters fell a prey to their own
wickedness and folly. These misfortunes were cast as reproach upon me;
and I was pursued with clamours and curses. I found it requisite to
obtain a guard for my person. I was abhorred by those for whom all my
vigilance was exerted, and insulted by the mouths that I supplied with
the necessaries of existence.

Nor was this my only source of alarm and uneasiness in my present
situation. I was by no means a dupe to the ostentatious civility of
the bashaw. I perfectly understood his insinuation when he invited
the frequent repetition of my visits. I knew that, however dearly I
purchased his friendship and patronage, I should still have to purchase
them again and again. His extortions upon me admitted of no limits,
except from his own modesty, or the estimate he might form of my
invisible resources. Bribery itself afforded me no complete security;
and, now that I had become an object of curiosity and remark, he had
sufficiently shown me I was at the mercy of his caprice, or that of his
master, for my liberty, and even for my life.

Yet, could I have resolved to quit Hungary, and seek the protection
of some more regular government, what benefit should I derive from a
removal? Mystery was the great and unconquerable bane of my situation,
and from the poisonous influence of mystery, the most regular system of
government was not competent to protect me. It would be idle to imagine
that, in any country on earth, a stranger would be permitted to launch
into such expenses as those in which I was engaged, without becoming an
object of suspicion, and being made liable to continual interruption
in his measures. Yet, unless allowed to use the resources I possessed,
of what advantage was it to be the depository of wealth without a
bound? Was it to be wished for a man under my circumstances, to have a
family, or to be without a family? When I had one, I found the legacy
of the stranger robbing me of every comfort of that sort, with the most
calamitous aggravations. When I was stripped of wife and children,
though no man could prize those benefits more dearly than I prized
them, I took to myself the consolation, that at least now I should
risk no one’s happiness but my own; and that, for a person exercising
my endowments, it was perhaps requisite to be free from every shackle
and incumbrance. I found however the topic from which I had consoled
myself, in reality the source of a new misfortune. I had the wealth of
a nobleman; but I was deprived of his adventitious attributes. I had
no illustrious ancestry to boast; I had neither lineage nor parent;
I had neither wife nor children, in whom mutually to reflect and see
reflected the elevatedness and generosity of my station. I had not even
the ordinary advantage, which is within the reach of almost every man,
of connections and acquaintance, friends handed down to me as a branch
of my patrimonial inheritance, friends whose value experience enabled
me to ascertain, and friends with whom long habits of familiarity had
given birth to reciprocal endearment. The bashaw had imputed to me the
design of forming a party. Alas! these, which are the great materials
for cementing party attachments, were totally denied me. I had no bonds
of alliance but those which money afforded, the coarsest, the meanest,
the least flattering, and the most brittle of those ligatures, that
afford the semblance of uniting man with man.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.


Aware of the difficulties which unavoidably sprung out of the nature of
my situation, I resolved immediately to endeavour to supply them to the
best of my power. I conceived that there was no consideration so urgent
upon me at the present moment, as that I should without loss of time
create to myself connections that might balance and keep at bay the
sallies of arbitrary rule, and that I should weave with my own hand the
cords of friendship.

I had no sooner formed this project, than an individual suggested
himself to my reflections, whom I judged to be, by a singular
concurrence of circumstances, happily fitted to be the subject of my
experiment, and admirably qualified to afford me protection in the
most unfavourable events. The name of this man was Bethlem Gabor. He
had been some time before brought to me by one of his friends, and he
was a man whom for a thousand reasons it was impossible to see and
converse with, without receiving the most indelible impression. He
was the lineal representative of one of the most illustrious houses
in Hungary. His vocation, like that of the majority of the Hungarian
nobility, had been arms; but, in the midst of a fraternity all of whom
were warlike, he stood conspicuous and alone. His courage, though cool
and deliberate, almost mounted to a degree of desperate rashness; and
the fertility of his invention, and the variety of his stratagems
did not fall short of his courage. The celerity of his measures was
equally distinguished; distance was no bar to him; and he had no
sooner conceived a project, however arduous, than it was executed. He
had formed under his own eye a band of men like himself, impetuous
yet deliberate, swift in execution, silent in march, invincible to
hardship, contemners of fatigue, of difficulties, of hunger, and of
thirst. When introduced to me, he was upwards of fifty years of age. He
was more than six feet in stature; and yet he was built as if it had
been a colossus, destined to sustain the weight of the starry heavens.
His voice was like thunder; and he never uttered a word, but it seemed
to shake his manly chest. His head and chin were clothed with a thick
and shaggy hair, in colour a dead black. He had suffered considerable
mutilation in the services through which he had passed; of one of
his hands three fingers were gone; the sight of his right eye was
extinguished, and the cheek half shot away, while the same explosion
had burned his complexion into a colour that was universally dun or
black. His nose was scarred, and his lips were thick and large. Bethlem
Gabor, though universally respected for the honour and magnanimity of a
soldier, was not less remarkable for habits of reserve and taciturnity.
But these habits misfortune had caused to become more deeply ingrafted
in his nature. During one of his military excursions, a party of
marauders had in his absence surprised his castle, burned it to the
ground, and savagely murdered his wife and children, and every living
creature within the walls. The same stroke that rendered him childless
made him also a beggar. He had been regarded for his proceedings as
an adherent to the Turkish standard, but he had always tenaciously
maintained the most complete independence. The adversity that had now
fallen upon him was too great. He would not become a pensioner of the
sultan; despair had taken fast possession of his heart. He disbanded
the body of men he had formed, and wandered a solitary outcast upon
the face of his country. For some time he seemed to have a savage
complacence in conceiving that the evil he had suffered was past all
remedy, and in spurning at those palliations and disguises with which
vulgar souls are accustomed to assuage their woe. Yet the energy of his
nature would not suffer him to rest: he wandered an outcast; but every
day engendered some new thought or passion: and it appeared probable
that he would not yet quit the stage of existence till he had left
behind him the remembrances of a terrible and desolating revenge.

It may seem strange that such a man as I have described should be the
individual I selected out of the whole Hungarian nation to make my
friend. It may seem that his qualities were better adapted to repel
than attract. My choice would not appear strange, if the reader could
have conversed with him, as I did. He was hideous to the sight; and
he never addressed himself to speak, that I did not feel my very heart
shudder within me. Seldom did he allow himself to open his thoughts;
but, when he did, great God! what supernatural eloquence seemed to
inspire and enshroud him! Not that upon such occasions he was copious
and Ciceronian, but that every muscle and every limb seemed to live,
and to quiver with the thoughts he expressed. The hearer could not
refuse to venerate, as well as fear him. I never pitied him; Bethlem
Gabor’s was a soul that soared to a sightless distance above the
sphere of pity; I can scarcely say I sympathised with him; but, when
I listened to his complaints, rather let me say his invectives, I was
astonished, overwhelmed, and motionless. The secret of the effects
he thus produced, lay in his own way of feeling the incidents he
described. Look at him, when he sat alone, wrapped in meditation, you
would say, “That is a man of iron; though adversity pour her fiercest
darts upon him, he is invulnerable; he is of too colossal a structure
to be accessible to human feelings and human affections.” Listen to
his narrative, or rather to the bursts of passion, which with him
supplied the place and performed the functions of narrative, you would
soon confess your mistake. While he spoke, he ceased to be a man, and
became something more amazing. When he alluded to what he had endured,
you did not compassionate him, for you felt that he was a creature
of another nature; but you confessed, that never man seemed to have
suffered so much, or to savour with such bitterness the cup of woe.
He did not love his wife or his children as any other man would do;
he probably never dandled or fondled them; his love was speechless;
and disdaining the common modes of exhibition, it might sometimes be
mistaken for indifference. But it brooded over and clung round his
heart; and, when it was disturbed, when the strong ties of domestic
charity were by the merciless hand of war snapped asunder, you then
saw its voluminous folds spread and convulsed before you, gigantic and
immeasurable. He cursed their murderers; he cursed mankind; he rose up
in fierce defiance of eternal providence; and your blood curdled within
you as he spoke. Such was Bethlem Gabor: I could not help admiring
him: his greatness excited my wonder and my reverence; and, while his
manners awed and overwhelmed me, I felt an inexplicable attachment to
his person still increasing in my bosom.

On his part, my kindness and partiality appeared scarcely less pleasing
to Bethlem Gabor, than his character and discourse were fascinating to
me. He had found himself without a confidant or a friend. His wife and
his children in a certain degree understood him; and, though he had an
atmosphere of repulsion beyond which no mortal ever penetrated, they
came to the edge of that, and rested there; they trembled involuntarily
at his aspect, but at the same time they adored and they loved him. The
rest of the world viewed him from a more fearful distance; respected
him, but dared not even in fancy be familiar with him. When therefore
he lost his family, he lost his all. He roamed the earth in solitude,
and all men made room for him as he passed. I was the first who, since
the fatal event that had made him childless and a beggar, had courted
his society, and invited his communications. I had dared to take the
lion by the paw, and seat myself next him in his den. There was a
similarity in our fortunes that secretly endeared him to me. We had
each by the malice of a hostile destiny, though in a very different
manner, been deprived of our families; we were each of us alone.
Fated each to be hereafter for ever alone; we blended ourselves the
one with the other as perfectly as we could. Often over our gloomy
bowl we mingled groans, and sweetened our draught as we drank it with
maledictions. In the school of Bethlem Gabor I became acquainted with
the delights of melancholy--- of a melancholy, not that contracted, but
that swelled the soul--of a melancholy that looked down upon the world
with indignation, and that relieved its secret load with curses and
execrations. We frequently continued whole nights in the participation
of these bitter joys; and were surprised, still at our serious board,
by the light of the morrow’s sun.

I have now, I believe, fully accounted for our intimacy, and displayed
the ligatures that secretly bound us to each other. It is scarcely
necessary to add, that my understanding confirmed what my heart
impelled. Bethlem Gabor appeared to me the fittest man in the world
upon whom to fix for my friend. We were qualified mutually to benefit
each other. My kindness, my unremitted attentions, the earnestness with
which I listened to and soothed his griefs, mitigated their agony. I
proposed, when I could once more reconcile and incite him to activity,
to repair his castle, and restore his fortune. On the other hand,
he was, of all the persons I could have pitched upon, the ablest to
protect me. By his birth he ranked among the first men of his country;
by his ability, at least as a partisan soldier, a character at that
time highly esteemed, he rose above them all.

For some time I regarded Bethlem Gabor as entirely my friend, and I
consulted him in every thing, in which, compatibly with the legacy of
the stranger of the summer-house, I could consult him. I told him of
the suspicions of the bashaw, and the precariousness of my safety. I
demanded his advice as to the best method of securing it. Ought I to
regard it as a more effectual or as a cheaper expedient, to attempt
to purchase the countenance of the sultan, instead of condescending
to bribe his minister? Ought I to set up for myself, and by rendering
myself the independent prince of one of the Hungarian provinces, defy
the Turk, or at least endeavour to negotiate with him from a more
respectable and commanding situation? I said more than enough under
these heads, as it afterwards appeared, to awaken strange imaginations
in a mind of so much penetration as that of Bethlem Gabor. In fine,
I demanded of him whether, in case of any great and formidable
danger falling on me, he would to the utmost of his power afford me
protection? When the question was first started, he swore to me with
his customary impressiveness and energy that he would.

While I was thus employed in consulting him, and opening to him as
far as was practicable my prospects and fears, I did not less succeed
in dissipating or suspending the despair of his melancholy. It was of
benefit to him in this respect, that, by opening to him my affairs,
I from time to time called off his attention from his personal
misfortunes. I proposed to him the rebuilding his castle, and I at
length obtained his permission to send off a corps of workmen for
that purpose. Beside the castle in which his wife and children had
been murdered, and which the marauders had nearly destroyed, he had
one considerably stronger, though void of all recommendation from
cheerfulness or beauty, in the more northerly part of the kingdom.
This we visited together. I restored the condition of his fields; with
considerable difficulty I replaced the cattle he had lost, by purchases
in Poland; and I revived his dilapidated revenues. At first he felt an
invincible repugnance to the receiving any advantage from the bounty
of another; but by continual remonstrances I was able to persuade him,
that he owed me nothing, and that what I did was no more than was
required from me by a regard for my own safety.

If ever on the face of the earth there lived a misanthrope, Bethlem
Gabor was the man. Never for a moment did he forget or forgive the
sanguinary catastrophe of his family; and for his own misfortunes he
seemed to have vowed vengeance against the whole human race. He almost
hated the very face of man; and, when expressions of cheerfulness,
peace, and contentment discovered themselves in his presence, I
could see, by the hideous working of his features, that his spirit
experienced intolerable agonies. To him such expressions were tones
horribly discordant; all was uproar and havoc within his own bosom,
and the gaiety of other men inspired him with sentiments of invincible
antipathy. He never saw a festive board without an inclination to
overturn it; or a father encircled with a smiling family, without
feeling his soul thrill with suggestions of murder. Something, I
know not what, withheld his hand: it might be some remaining atom of
humanity: it might be--for his whole character was contemplative and
close--it might be that he regarded that as a pitiful and impotent
revenge, which should cause him the next hour to be locked up as a
madman, or put to death as criminal. Horrible as was his personal
aspect, and wild and savage as was his mind, yet, as I have already
said, I felt myself attached to him. I knew that all the unsocial
propensities that animated him, were the offspring of love, were
the sentiments of a lioness bereaved of her young; and I found an
undescribable and exhaustless pleasure in examining the sublime
desolation of a mighty soul.

Bethlem Gabor had at first regarded me with some degree of partiality.
Kindness in almost all cases begets kindness; he could not see how
much I interested myself about and how much I courted him, without
feeling for me a sentiment different from that he confessed for other
men. I saw however after some time, with inexpressible grief, that his
regard for me, instead of increasing, suffered perceptible diminution.
Our propensities were opposed to each other. He rejoiced in disorder
and desolation as in his congenial element; my present pursuit
was the restoration of public order and prosperity. He repeatedly
expostulated with me on this. I had sometimes in our conversations, in
the bitterness of my recollections, exclaimed on myself as the most
unfortunate and most persecuted of men, though without entering into an
explanation of my sufferings. He reminded me of these exclamations. He
reproached me as a contemptible and pusillanimous wretch, that I did
not, like him, resolve amply and memorably to revenge my own sufferings
upon my species at large. In his estimate, the poorest and most servile
of all maxims was, that of the author of the christian religion, to
repay injury with favour, and curses with benediction.

I perceived with grief that the kindness towards me that had been
excited in Bethlem Gabor’s mind, rather declined than augmented;
but I was very far from being aware of the degree in which, as I
afterwards found, this sentiment had relapsed into its opposite. It
seems, I inflicted on him a daily torture by my daily efforts for
the dissemination of happiness. Of these he had not been at first
completely aware. His mind had been too much absorbed in its own
feelings to attend very distinctly to any thing I did, unless it were
done in his presence. But, in proportion as I soothed his sorrows, and
made him my confidant, the film was removed; and all that he saw had
the peculiar misfortune to excite at once his contempt and his rage.
The finishing stroke that I gave to the animosity which, unknown
to me, was now brooding and engendering in his breast, consisted
in my bestowing an important benefit upon one, against whom he had
entertained a long and eternal feud.




CHAPTER XXXIX.


While Bethlem Gabor became every day more confirmed in his antipathy
against me, I reposed in him an unsuspecting confidence--a confidence
more extensive than I had, since the singular and fatal acquisition I
had made, reposed in any other man. Frequently for a considerable time
together he resided under my roof; frequently we went forth together
in those excursions which either my projects or his views rendered
it necessary for us to make. In his character of a nobleman of great
consideration in his native country, he was now rising like a phœnix
from its ashes. His castles were repairing; his property was restored;
the list of his retainers daily became more numerous; he revived and
carefully recruited the martial band, which, in the first exacerbations
of his despair, he had dismissed from his service. My purse and all
that I had were his; he never made a demand upon me that I did not
instantly supply; I reaped a particular pleasure from the largeness and
frequency of his requisitions; there was nothing for which I was more
anxious, than to bind him to me in indissoluble ties of gratitude and
affection.

Little, alas! did I understand the compound of tenderness and ferocity,
of decisiveness and inscrutability, with which I was now concerned.
My friend, such I esteemed him, had been absent some time; I expected
his return to my residence at Buda; and anxious to pay him every mark
of attention and respect, I set out to meet him. It was scarcely safe,
during the existing hostilities between the Austrians and the Turks, to
travel any where without a guard; I had the precaution in the present
instance to take with me an attendance of twenty men.

It was after having partaken of a slight and early dinner that I set
out on my excursion. The season was remarkably fine, and the air genial
and balsamic. I scarcely ever commenced any tour with more agreeable
sensations. The harvest was already ripe; and, as I passed along, I
saw reapers from time to time entering upon the first essay of their
interesting occupation. I felt that I had at length surmounted one of
those difficulties, with which I had been so strongly assailed, and to
which I had refused to yield. If I were not free from apprehensions
from the arbitrary nature of the government under which I lived,
I believed however that I had nothing further to dread from the
misconstruction and animosity of the nation I preserved. My anxiety as
to whether I should be able to substantiate the benefit I had sought to
confer, was at an end; and I had little doubt that, with the plenteous
crops which were on the point of being gathered, my popularity would
return, and the gratitude of my clients become more ardent than ever.
It was a delicious enjoyment that I now experienced; the pleasures that
the eye unavoidably takes in from the spectacle of a luxuriant autumn,
became blended in my mind with the ideas of famine put to flight, my
own rectitude vindicated, and the benevolent purposes realised, the
prosecution of which had cost me so profound a heartache.

We at length passed the lines of the soldiers planted for the defence
of the soil against the depredations of the enemy. I had calculated
that I should meet my guest a few leagues from Buda; I was deceived
in my estimate. The day however of his arrival was fixed; I could not
be mistaken in his route; I resolved not to turn back without meeting
him. The road I took led upon the borders of that part of Hungary which
owned the Austrian yoke; the shades of night were fast gathering round
us, and we heard at a distance the alarm-guns and the drums of the
enemy. I was not however a novice in the appearances of a country, the
seat of military excursions and war; and, if my mind were not wholly
free from perturbation and uncertainty, I at least resolved not to be
turned aside from my purpose. We travelled two hours longer; still
no notice of the approach of Bethlem Gabor. At length a question was
started whether we were still in the right road, and I thought it
advisable to hold a sort of council of war to deliberate respecting our
further proceedings. Having assembled my attendants for that purpose,
I was now first struck with the apprehensions and timidity which they
unanimously betrayed. They had been drawn out rather for show, and to
keep accidental stragglers in awe, than with the expectation of actual
service. I became sensible that nothing was to be hoped from their
resistance in the event of an action; and the utmost I could aim at was
in the mean time to hold them together by the sentiment of a common
danger.

It was resolved to return; I began to be apprehensive that Bethlem
Gabor had been prevented by some unexpected occurrence from observing
his appointment. Scarcely had we faced about, before we heard a body of
cavalry approaching us. I called to my party to halt. I soon discerned,
from symptoms not difficult to be remarked by a careful observer, that
the party at hand was composed of Austro-Hungarians. We had every thing
to fear from them. I held myself bound under these circumstances first
to make experiment of the fleetness of our horses. I however charged my
people to keep together, and not to suffer the enemy, by means of our
inadvertence and folly, to make an easy prize of us one after another.
In a short time I found that our pursuers sensibly gained ground upon
us. I was mounted upon an excellent beast, and could easily have rode
away from my troop, while they would have been placed as a sort of
intercepting object between me and the enemy. But I had too much of a
military spirit not instantly to reject so inglorious an expedient. I
called a second time to my attendants to halt. I judged that the party
of our antagonists was less numerous than ours. I was convinced that
our common safety depended upon our concerted resistance. Filled with
the gallantry that my situation inspired, I did not perceive, till it
was too late, that my present call to halt was attended to by few; even
those few rather hung back, divided between apprehension and shame. I
was the foremost, and, before I was aware, I found myself, through
the means of the darkness, enveloped by the enemy. From my appearance
they judged that I was the master, and the rest my attendants; they
contented themselves therefore with the prize they had made, and did
not give themselves the trouble to pursue the fugitives. They eagerly
enquired of me who I was; and, comparing my answers with various
circumstances which rumour had brought to their ear, they easily
concluded that I was the rich stranger of Buda. The character they had
heard of me did not produce in these freebooters any sentiments of
forbearance, or demonstrations of respect; the only point about which
persons of their habits were concerned, was how they should make the
greatest advantage of what the fortune of war had thrown in their way.

While they were consulting, and various expedients were started by
one and another for this purpose, a second alarm was given, and one
of the party being despatched to reconnoitre, presently returned with
intelligence, that the persons approaching were horsemen of the enemy,
and that they amounted, as he guessed, to forty in number. Upon this
information the party whose prisoner I was, agreed to return with
all expedition by the way they had come, and commanded me upon pain
of death to proceed in their company. This menace had not the effect
to deprive me of courage or presence of mind; and I easily conceived
that the readiest way to deliver myself from my embarrassment would be
to join at the first opportunity the band of Turco-Hungarians, whose
approach had occasioned our sudden retreat. The darkness of the night
was favourable to my purpose; and, taking advantage of a sudden winding
in the road, I slackened all at once the pace of my horse without being
observed by my companions, who, as the enemy approached, had now their
thoughts almost wholly intent upon the safety of their retreat. They
passed me; and I no sooner perceived that to be the case, than, covered
from their observation by the intervening inclosure, I turned my horse,
and gradually, as my distance from my keepers increased, urged him to a
fuller speed. It was not long before I came up with the band which had
produced our alarm; and hailing them with the acclamation, “Long live
the mighty sultan!” was without difficulty admitted into their troop. I
instantly understood to my great joy that this was the party of Bethlem
Gabor that I had come out to meet.

He received me with much cordiality, and seemed greatly rejoiced that
fortune had made him the instrument of my rescue. He proposed however
that, having met on the road, I should now, instead of proceeding to
Buda, return with him to his northern castle, from which our distance
was scarcely greater than from the metropolis. The proposal was such
as I had not expected, nor could I well comprehend the purpose with
which it was made. But the habitual demeanour of Bethlem Gabor neither
accorded with his minutely assigning a reason for what he did, nor
was calculated to encourage enquiry in another. I saw no material
objection, and therefore felt little scruple in yielding to his
desires. Our brief consultation on this point passed at some little
distance from the rest of the troop.

When the morning broke, the first thing that excited my attention was
the appearance of his followers. They were full forty in number, well
mounted, of a large and athletic figure, with sun-burnt faces, immense
whiskers and a ferocious countenance. I thought I had never seen so
tremendous a band. To me they were every one of them strangers; of
all the persons that surrounded me, the only one of whom I had the
slightest knowledge was Bethlem Gabor himself. I know not why it was,
but I no sooner beheld my situation than I was struck with alarm. I
saw myself completely in the power of a man who three months before
was ignorant even of my existence. I had not a single attendant of
my own, not an individual with me over whom I had personal authority
or command. I had no reason to distrust my host; towards me his
demeanour had ever been frank, confidential, and manly; I had every
imaginable claim upon his generosity and his gratitude. But our senses
are often the masters of our mind, and reason vainly opposes itself
to the liveliness of their impressions. Every time that I lifted my
eyes, and saw myself hemmed in by these barbarians, my heart seemed
involuntarily to fail me. Bethlem Gabor too appeared to neglect me;
he had never shown himself so little obliging and attentive as at this
moment; and, aided by the rest of the scene, I thought I had never
beheld him so deformed or so tremendous. I was more than half inclined
to wish myself again a prisoner with the Austrians.

When we arrived at the castle, we were all of us fatigued and hungry;
we had roamed during the whole night. A repast was prepared; we sat
down to partake of it. “Excuse me,” said Bethlem Gabor, in a low voice
as he passed me, “that I this night offer you the fare of a soldier;
to-morrow you shall be accommodated in a different manner.” The words
were innocent; the proceeding natural; but there was a mysterious
gloom, at least as I thought, in the tone in which he spoke, that
electrified me. The hall in which we supped was spacious and lofty; the
naked walls and rafters were imbrowned with age. Though it was daybreak
as we entered, the windows were still darkened, and the apartment was
illuminated only by the partial glare of lamps depending from the roof.
As I sat at table with the troop of my host, I appeared to myself as if
inclosed in a cavern of banditti. Though excellent partisans, skilful
in execution, and perfect in their discipline, they were unpolished
in their manners and brutal in their conversation. I had been inured
from infancy to all the refinement that the age in which I lived had
any where to boast; and, amidst the various evils I had suffered, that
of being associated with the vulgar and the base had never presented
itself. While they uttered, now a loathsome jest, and now a sanguinary
ejaculation, I became ashamed of my species, and the pride of manhood
perished within me. They however paid little attention either to my
feelings or my person; and, accustomed as I had been, whether with
friends or enemies, to be regarded as of some importance, I found
myself unaccountably and suddenly dwindled into a cipher. I felt it
like a release from the state of a galley-slave, when Bethlem Gabor
proposed that we should break up our meeting and retire to rest.




CHAPTER XL.


A succession of gloomy thoughts revolved in my mind for some time after
I was left to myself. I was however overcome with fatigue, and, after
an interval of harassing meditations, insensibly fell asleep. I was
awakened after some hours’ repose, by the presence of Bethlem Gabor
standing by the side of my couch. He invited me to rise, and, when
I had attired myself, started the plan of our visiting together the
various apartments of the castle, a small part of which only had been
seen by me when I was last at this place. Among other things, he told
me, there was a subterranean of most wonderful extent, interspersed
with a variety of cells and lurking places, of which no man had to his
knowledge ever ascertained the number.

The same dreary complexion of thought followed me to-day, which had
been first produced in me upon my reception into the troop of Bethlem
Gabor the preceding night. My sensations were of the most depressing
and discomfiting nature; I felt as if I were the slave of some dark,
mysterious tyrant, and dragged along supinely wherever he motioned me
to go. I tasked myself seriously; I reasoned with myself. I felt that
it was no idle and every-day part that I was called to sustain; and I
resolved that I would not be ruined by my own inactivity and cowardice.
Yet, when I examined the question dispassionately, I could not find
that I had any occasion for courage, and I confessed that it was not
less censurable, to discover a useless spirit of mistrust and defiance,
than to desert one’s preservation where resistance was demanded.
What reason had I to suspect a man between whom and myself there had
prevailed so much mutual confidence? None, none, I replied, but the
causeless and superstitious misgivings of my own mind! Even if I had
ground to distrust him, what remedy had I against his ill faith, placed
as I was in the midst of his own domains, and surrounded by men devoted
to his service? To discover apprehension under such circumstances, was
to excite animosity.--These reasonings particularly occurred to my
mind, as I stood waiting for the torch, which he had himself gone to
procure that he might attend me to the subterranean caverns.--I had
as yet seen no one, since we broke up from our nightly repast, but my
host. “We will breakfast,” said he, “when we return from viewing these
curiosities.”

We crept along a succession of dark and gloomy vaults, almost in
silence. Bethlem Gabor, though he led me on, and discharged the
office of a guide, seemed to have small inclination to assume that
of an interpreter. This was sufficiently in unison with his ordinary
character, to have little claim to excite surprise. Yet the reader
will not on reflection greatly wonder that my present situation was
far from agreeable. I was alone in passages which, to judge from any
discoverable token, you would scarcely imagine had for ages been trod
by a human creature. The voice was lost amidst the damps of these
immense caverns; nor was it possible by any exertion to call the hand
of man to your aid. My guide was an individual whom calamity had
prompted to quarrel with the world; of strong feelings indeed, of
capacious thought; but rugged, ferocious, brutal, and inaccessible
to prayer. I had chosen him for my protector and ally; I had never
intended to put myself in his power. There was a mystery in his
carriage, a something not to be explained, a shell that no human forces
could penetrate, that was mortal to confidence, and might quail the
stoutest.

I thought there would be no end to our pilgrimage. At length we came to
a strong door, cross-barred and secured with a frame of iron. Bethlem
Gabor unlocked it. We had no sooner entered, that it impetuously
closed behind us. “What is that?” said I, startled at the loudness of
the report. “Come on,” cried my host; “it is only the wind whistling
through the caverns: the spring-bolt is shot, but I have the key in my
hand!” At the opposite end of the apartment was another door with an
ascent of five steps leading to it. Bethlem Gabor unlocked that also,
and then faced about with the torch in his hand: I was close behind
him. “Stay where you are!” said he with a furious accent, and thrust me
violently from him. The violence was unexpected: I staggered from the
top of the steps to the bottom. This door closed with as loud a report
as the other; Bethlem Gabor disappeared; I was left in darkness.

For an instant I doubted whether the situation in which I thus found
myself were the result of design or of accident. The shutting of the
door might be ascribed to the latter: the action however, and the words
of my host did not admit of that interpretation. I stood motionless,
astonished, and almost incapable of reflection. What an incredible
reverse was thus the creature of a moment! Yesterday I possessed
unbounded treasures, and the hearts of the whole Turco-Hungarian
nation. Yesterday, as I rode forth on this fatal excursion, I beheld
the food of a mighty people, mature for consumption, the growth of my
exertions; and it will not be thought surprising that my heart leaped
within me at the sight. Who would not have envied the unparalleled
eminence at which I had arrived? My triumphs were attended with no
melancholy exceptions to damp their joy. They were the children of no
intrigue; they were manly, frank, ingenuous, and honourable. My laurels
were stained with no drop of blood, were tarnished with no tears of the
widow and the orphan. How much more noble to rescue mankind from famine
and death, than to violate the honest pride of their nature with the
exhibition of victories and trophies!

Yet, truly considered, there was nothing abrupt in the reverse under
which I was now suffering. The whole was a chain, every link of which
was indissolubly connected from one end to the other. My attempt to
rescue a people from the horrors of famine necessarily exposed me
to unfavourable accidents and misconstruction. It inevitably led to
my application to the government for its aid. It could not fail to
excite the alarms and jealousies of government as to the tendency of
my proceedings. By exhibiting me as the possessor of immense wealth,
with very limited means for the protection of that wealth, it marked
me a prey to a rapacious viceroy or his more despotic master. When I
became sensible of the precarious situation in which I stood towards
the powers of the state, could I have fallen upon a more natural
expedient, than the endeavour to cover myself with the shield of
friendship and gratitude in the person of one of its nobles? But this
expedient would almost infallibly lead to the placing myself sooner or
later in the power of the man whose friendship I sought. I had done so,
and this was the termination of my views and my projects!

I now well understood the purpose of that inattention and neglect
with which Bethlem Gabor had treated me the preceding evening, the
uneasiness resulting from which I had blamed in myself at the time,
as the dictate of weakness and unworthy suspicion. Yesterday I had
been placed under the safeguard of a nation; every man in Buda and
its environs was familiar with my person; every man would have been
ready almost to sacrifice his life to procure my safety. Now I was far
from the scene of my philanthropical exertions; no one in the troop of
Bethlem Gabor knew who I was; he had appeared to treat me the preceding
evening with indifference and contempt; if they saw me no more, no
curiosity would by that circumstance be excited in their minds. My
clients on the other hand in the vicinity of the metropolis, however
great an interest they might take in my fortune, had no clue that could
lead them to the knowledge of it. They must suppose me a prisoner with
the Austrians, or that I had been killed, in resisting to become their
prisoner. I was cut off from all assistance and discovery, and left as
much in the power of my treacherous ally, as if I had been alone with
him, oppressed with the utmost disparity of personal force, in the
remotest island of the Pacific Ocean.

Such were the reflections that early suggested themselves to my mind in
the solitude and darkness in which I was thus unexpectedly involved.
Meanwhile one tedious hour succeeded to another, and I remained
unintruded on and unnoticed. I could form no conjecture as to the
object of Bethlem Gabor in the atrocious perfidy he had committed.
Could he have any resentment against me, and did he meditate revenge?
He had received from me nothing but benefits. Did he employ restraint
on my person as the means of extortion? I could not conceive that he
could have any clue leading him to the discovery of my grand secret;
and, short of this, my bounties had been so exuberant, as, I imagined,
left him nothing to wish. In this wilderness of conjecture I however
fixed upon extortion as a motive less incredible than revenge. I
impatiently waited, till the appearance of my tyrant should free me
from some part of my present uncertainty.

He did not appear. In the mean time I was in a condition feeble and
exhausted. The exercise of yesterday, the hourly-baffled expectation
of meeting him whom I had called my friend, the alternation of being
first taken prisoner and afterwards rescued, had extremely fatigued
me. We had travelled during the whole night. Yet the unaccountable
dejection of mind under which I laboured on our arrival at Bethlem
Gabor’s castle had prevented me from taking almost any share in the
coarse repast that had then been set before us. The entrance of my host
in the morning had rendered my slumbers short. As I followed him to my
dungeon, unconscious whither I went, my limbs ached, and my heart ached
still more. I was ill prepared for a fast of thirty-six hours which the
brutality of my jailor inflicted upon me. After having long expected
him in vain, I gave myself up to despair. What a termination of life
for him who possessed the philosopher’s stone!

I cannot do justice to the sensations that now took possession of my
mind. It was not the deadly calm of despair, for I still expected every
moment when Bethlem Gabor would appear. I believed than he would, and I
believed that he would not, leave me to perish. I listened with eager
attention to every sound, and my soul floated on the howling winds.
In vain! nothing came of it; there was no alteration in the sound, or
only those vicissitudes to which the howling of the wind is unavoidably
subject. I then turned away in anguish; I cursed; I stamped with my
feet; I smote my forehead with my closed hand; I tore my hair. Anon
another sound arrested my attention; it was a different howling; it
seemed to be like a human voice; my fancy created to me the tread of a
human foot. I listened with more intentness of soul than ever. It was
again in vain!

No, no; he will not come! he will never come. Why should I agitate
myself to no purpose? Let me lie down and die!--I reasoned with myself.
Why should I wish to live? I am nothing to any human being: I am alone
in the boundless universe; I have no tie to existence. St. Leon has no
wife; St. Leon has no child; he has neither connection nor friend in
the world. Even in this wretched vision of the philosopher’s stone,
have I not tried it enough? have I any hopes from it? is it not time
that I should throw away that and existence together?--My meditations
were ineffectual. I suppose it is the case with all men thus violently
thrust out of life in the full possession of their faculties--I know it
was the case with me,--the more peremptory was my summoner, the more
obstinately I clung to the worthless toy.

At length I laid myself down on the floor; and, if I occasionally
listened, I no longer ran to the walls and the doors to catch the
uncertain sounds. The gnawings I now felt within were intolerable.
They were at one period so severe, that I can compare them to nothing,
but the sensation of having swallowed a glowing ember. Afterwards, the
weakness of nature would no longer feed this excruciating pain, and it
subsided into a starting and convulsive throb; the pain was diversified
with intervals of a death-like and insupportable sickness.--But, no;
I will not attempt to describe the horrors of hunger sublimed by
despair, where the torture of the mind gives new pungency and uproar
to the corporeal anguish. The image, as it now presents itself to my
recollection, is too dreadful.

At last I sunk into a state of insensibility; and the agony I had
suffered seemed drawn to its final close. The busy turmoil, the
feverish dream of human existence was at an end. I shut my eyes, and I
believed I should open them no more.




CHAPTER XLI.


How long I endured this suspension of the vital faculties I cannot
tell. The next impression on my sensorium, subsequent to those I have
described, was a sort of external twitching and violence that seemed
to persecute me. It was an importunity from which I felt desirous to
escape; I longed to be undisturbed and at rest. The intruder on my
quiet would not leave me; and I at length roused myself, as if to put
away my cause of molestation. My thoughts were all confounded and
obscure; I knew not where, I could scarcely be said to know who, I was.
A little more effort brought with it a further capacity of perception;
I saw before me, what was now the chief object of my mortal aversion,
the figure of Bethlem Gabor. It was some time longer, before I became
aware that he had been employed in taking up my apparently lifeless
corpse, placing it on a stone-bench in the side of the cave, and
chaining it to the wall. He observed the motions that indicated in me
returning life: he remarked the stare of my glassy and rayless eyes; he
now spoke with a stern and unpitying voice--“There is food; there is a
light; eat!” Having thus said, he left me.

What a cruel and remorseless treatment! He cared not for my life; he
disdained to make the slightest exertion to restore me; he left it to
chance whether I should revive or perish. The figure of a dying man
that I presented, did not make one fibre of his bosom bend or quiver.

I revived; I ate. By degrees I recovered from the deadly languor which
had invaded my senses. In about twelve hours longer Bethlem Gabor
returned with a new supply of sustenance. I was now strong enough to
be able to converse with him. I heard the heavy sound of opening locks
and removing bolts before he entered, and I summoned my faculties to
expostulate with him.

“Why am I here? What is the meaning of the unworthy way in which you
treat me?”

“It is,”--he regarded me with a truculent aspect, as if he would pierce
through my heart,--“because I hate you!”

“You hate me? Good God! is it possible? What evil have I done to you?
What good have I not done you? What supplies have I refused you? What
occasions have I neglected of studying your advantage, your interest,
and your honour? If thus your hatred is purchased, how shall that man
demean himself who is to purchase your love?”

“Oh, think not my hatred idle or capricious! Heaven knows, I would have
refrained from hating you if I had been able; I struggled against it
with all the energies of my soul. But you have committed towards me
the most mortal offences that man ever endured. There is an antipathy
between your nature and mine, that all the menstruums in the world
could never bring to coalesce.”

“Eternal Providence! and what is the source of this antipathy?”

“And do you profess ignorance? Have you not gone on day after day with
the full consciousness and will to torment me? Have I not warned you,
and expostulated with you times without number?”

“Of what have you warned me?”

“I hate mankind. I was not born to hate them. I have no native
obliquity of character. I have no diabolical maliciousness of
constitution. But they have forced me to hate them, and the debt of
abhorrence shall be amply paid.

“I loved as never mortal loved. No human heart was ever so devoted, and
centred, and enveloped in the kindly affections of family and parentage
as mine has been. Was not my wife, were not my children, murdered?
When I came home to feast my eyes and tranquillise my soul with the
sight of them, did I not find all waste and desolation? Did I not find
their bodies naked, pale, disfigured with wounds, plunged in blood, and
already putrid? This was the welcome I looked for! This was the object
I so speeded to see! No, never was a moment like that! My whole nature
was changed in an instant. My eyes were blasted and dried to horn. My
blood froze in my well stored veins. I have no longer delight but in
human misery.

“My revenge is not causeless; this was not the act of individuals. All
men, in the place of these murderers, would have done as they did.
They are in a league together. Human pity and forbearance never had a
harbour but in my breast; and I have now abjured them. With something
more of inwrought vigour and energy, I will become like to my brethren.
All men are excited by the same motives, urged by the same temptations,
influenced by the same inducements. Why should I attempt a futile
distinction, when nature had made none? All men bear the same figure; I
cannot view the human figure without a torture the most dreadful.”

“I always knew,” answered I, “your general hatred of mankind; but your
manners and your behaviour persuaded me that you exempted me from the
general censure.”

“I wished to do so; you made the attempt impossible. You told me, that
you had suffered the same misfortunes which I had; that you, by the
injustice and persecutions of men, had also lost your wife and your
children. I hailed you as a brother; in my heart I swore to you eternal
friendship; I said, we will carry on this holy warfare together. We
communicated to each other our mutual sorrows; with you, and you only,
I found moments of consolation.

“Soon I discovered my mistake. Instead of, like me, seeking occasions
of glorious mischief and vengeance, you took upon yourself to be the
benefactor and parent of mankind. What vocation had you to the task?
With the spirit of a slave who, the more he is beaten, becomes the
more servile and submissive, you remunerated injuries with benefits.
I found that there was not within you one atom of generous sentiment,
one honest glow of fervent indignation. Chicken-hearted wretch! poor,
soulless poltroon! to say the best of you, to your insensate heart it
was the same whether you were treated with reverence or scorn. I saw
you hunted, hooted at, and pursued by the people you fed; you held on
your course, and fed them still. I was compelled to witness or to hear
of your senseless liberalities every day I lived. Could I submit to
this torment, and not endeavour to remove it? I hate the man in whom
kindness produces no responsive affection, and injustice no swell, no
glow of resentment. I hated you the more, because, having suffered what
I had suffered, your feelings and conduct on the occasion have been the
reverse of mine. Your character, I thank God! is of all beings the most
opposite to that of Bethlem Gabor.

“At length you filled up the measure of the various thwartings with
which you daily insulted me. There was one native of Hungary between
whom and me there subsisted an open and eternal war. I relate in no
human ear the cause of my animosity to that man. Suffice it, that it
was deep, immeasurable, inexpiable. With a refinement of cruelty and
insult difficult to conceive, you chose that man for one of the objects
of your beneficence. Would I consent to see my name joined in pension
list with my mortal enemy? The injury you inflicted on me would have
been less if you had stabbed me to the heart. Less? That would have
been a blessing. I impose on myself the task of living for my revenge:
but never shall I deem that man my foe, who should rid me of all this
tumult of passions, and this insupportable load of existence together.

“You have heard my motives. You may wonder at, you may censure them:
but they are human. I have nothing further to say to you now: you have
no need to recur to expostulation; expostulation never moved the heart
of Bethlem Gabor. Hereafter you shall hear more!”

Thus speaking, he left me; and I must confess, with whatever disgrace
to my sagacity, he opened upon me a new world. I conceived not, till
now, the faintest suspicion of what had been labouring in his bosom.
Amidst all my experience of the varieties of human character, this was
a species that had never fallen under my observation before. What a
painful and mortifying occurrence is it in human life, when we have
lived with a man from day to day, when we have conversed with him
familiarly, and seen him in all the changes of circumstance, and when
we flatter ourselves we have penetrated all the recesses of his heart,
suddenly to start upon something portentous that brooded there, of
which to that moment we had not the lightest suspicion! I am not the
only individual to whom this event has occurred.

In a subsequent visit of Bethlem Gabor to my cell (for he only attended
me with provisions, he would intrust the secret of my confinement to
no other mortal), I intreated him to inform me with what intention
he retained me a prisoner, and to fix a price on my ransom. To this
overture he appeared to yield some degree of attention. He made no
explicit answer, but asked with an inquisitive and severe tone, in
what manner I imagined I could procure money in my dungeon?

“Let us agree upon the terms, and set me at large. You have never found
me deceitful, and you shall not find me deceitful now.”

“Do not hope I will consent to that. I ask you again, in what manner do
you imagine you can procure money in your dungeon?”

I reflected for a moment. Liberty is ineffably sweet; and whatever
followed, upon the present overture, I was determined not to neglect
the faintest prospect that led to a termination of my confinement.

“There is,” answered I, “in my mansion at Buda, a chest which, if it
can be brought to me hither, will enable me to supply your demands.
I have the key in my custody, and no key but my own will unlock the
treasure.”

“Give me the key!” replied Bethlem Gabor.

“No,” rejoined I, “it is in my custody; it is not upon my person: I
have taken care of that. No human hand shall touch it but my own.”

“And how can I cause this chest to be brought to you without risking
a discovery of your situation, or that I had a concern in your
disappearance?”

“Of that,” said I, “judge for yourself. I have made a proposition to
you, and I have done enough. I will have no share in the detail of its
execution.”

“Well,” said Bethlem Gabor, after having ruminated a moment, “the chest
you shall have; I undertake that. Describe it.”

I described the chest, and its situation in my house, with a minuteness
that made mistake impossible.

After a considerable time it was brought to me. It was too bulky and
ponderous to be introduced into my cell by a single arm. But Bethlem
Gabor, having first caused me unconsciously to swallow a powerful
opiate, found no difficulty, either to conceal my person in the dark
shadows of this ragged subterranean, or to cause some of his followers
to place the chest within my reach, believing that they placed it in
a vacant apartment. I awoke, and found it at hand. I was secure that
the lock was such a one as could not be forced; but I examined the
different surfaces, to see whether violence of any other sort had been
exercised on it. There were marks of damage, but not sufficiently
unequivocal to enable me to form a certain judgment on this point.
The chest contained, not gold, but the implements for making and
fashioning gold. Allowing for the distance from which it was brought,
they appeared to be pretty exactly in the state in which I left them.
I had never placed much confidence in this expedient for softening the
heart of Bethlem Gabor; but I perceived that it would serve at worst to
divert my thoughts, and, by exciting in me some share of expectation,
might call off my attention from the miseries of my present condition.
Embracing the occasions when I was most secure against the intrusion
of my jailor, I provided myself with the sum that had been previously
agreed on between us. My task being finished, I carefully displayed
the produce of my labour, against the next time Bethlem Gabor should
visit my cell. He viewed it with an air of sullen and gloomy triumph;
he removed it from the cave which was my habitation, to an apartment
of this subterraneous abode, little distant from my own. When he had
concluded this employment, it seemed to be a just inference, that he
was to give me my liberty. He did no such thing. Without uttering a
word, he closed the door of my cavern, locked it, and departed.

When Bethlem Gabor next entered my cell, I reproached him with this,
as with the breach of a solemn engagement. His first answer was an
infernal laugh, expressive of derision, hard-heartedness, and contempt.
By and by, however, he condescended to explain himself more fully.

“I made no engagement,” cried he. “You talked of a ransom, and
I suffered you to talk. I made you no answer; I gave you no
encouragement. Boy, I deceived you not! No; though my heart pants for
vengeance and for misery, I will never be guilty of treachery; I will
break no engagements; I am a knight and a soldier. You have given me
ten thousand ducats; what are ten thousand ducats to me? Do you think
I am uninformed of your secret? I opened your chest; I found no gold;
its contents were crucibles, minerals, chemical preparations, and
the tools of an artist. You are possessed of the grand arcanum, the
philosophers stone. If I had a doubt of it before, the transaction of
yesterday converted conjecture into certainty. And did you suppose,
idiot, driveller that you are, that I would take ten thousand ducats in
commutation for wealth inexhaustible? No; you are my prisoner, and may
choose, in this infallible dilemma, whether you will remain my slave,
to supply me daily resources as I shall daily think proper to demand,
or at once make over to me your whole mystery, and place me in this
respect on a level with yourself.”

It was now my part to be peremptory and firm.

“I refuse,” said I, “every part of your dilemma, and all that you can
propose to me. Do you talk of my remaining your slave, to supply you
with daily resources? Do you imagine that, shut up in this dungeon, I
will nevertheless labour for your gratification? Do you believe that
that gift, which I received as the instrument of my own happiness
and the benefit of mankind, shall be made the pledge of my perpetual
imprisonment?

“With regard to imparting to you the secret you suppose me to possess,
I answer without hesitation, that, dearly as I prize liberty, and
numerous as are the motives you may think I have to prize it, I will
not purchase my liberty at that rate. I would rather spend the days of
eternity in this cavern, than comply with your proposal. The gift of
the philosopher’s stone, the moment a man possesses it, purifies his
mind from sordid and ignoble inducements. The endowment which raises
him so much above his species, makes him glory in his superiority,
and cherish his innocence. He cannot, if he would, mingle in the low
passions and pursuits of the generality of mankind. For myself, I
value too much the verdict of my own heart, ever to allow myself to
be influenced in the main concerns of my existence by menaces and
compulsion. Beside, this gift I received for holy and beneficent
purposes; to such it is consecrated; and if I ever impart it, I must
select its depository with all the assiduity and penetration it is
practicable for me to exert. You I will henceforth benefit no more. You
hate me; my disapprobation of you is fixed and irrevocable. I weep
to think how much I have been deceived in you; I weep to think how
many high and heroic qualities in your breast are now converted into
malignity and venom.--You the possessor of the philosopher’s stone!
You tell me, the sole pursuit of the rest of your life is revenge
and human misery. What an image do you raise in my mind, if, with
such dispositions, you possessed the means which the acquisition of
riches inexhaustible would confer on you? And do you believe that any
consideration on earth could induce me to realise such an image?”

“As you please,” replied Bethlem Gabor indignantly. “I have nothing to
propose to you. Think you that, either as my enemy or my slave, and I
hold you for both, I would descend to negotiate with you? I simply told
you your situation. Yours be the consequences of your wilfulness and
folly!

“One mistake however that I see you make respecting my purposes, I will
remove. You seem to suppose that, if you were to communicate to me your
secret, I would then set you at liberty. No, by heavens! This cavern is
your abode for ever. You shall never go forth from it alive; and, when
you are dead, here your flesh shall moulder, and your skeleton shall
rest, as long as the world remains. Look round your walls! Enter fully
into possession of your final home! I know that to keep you here and
alive my prisoner, I must in a certain sense imprison myself. But at
that I do not murmur. I shall have the gratification of beholding my
foe, and seeing him daily wither in disappointment. You wish to be a
father to the human race; and I shall deem the scope of my misanthropy
almost satisfied, while, in your restraint, I image myself as making
the human race an orphan. Never shall Bethlem Gabor set at large a man
of your unnatural and gall-less disposition, and your powers for the
indulgence of that disposition.

“Sieur de Chatillon, I do not want your secret: it suffices that I know
you possess it. Have I not yourself in my keeping? It will be more joy
to me rudely to issue my commands, and to see you complying with them
in spite of the most heartfelt reluctance, than to possess the richest
gift on earth in the fullest independence. Think you Bethlem Gabor
incompetent to tame the tenant of this wretched cavern? Boy, you _are_
my prisoner; you _shall be_ my creature. I will humble you at my feet,
and teach you to implore my bounty for the most miserable pittance.
Look to it! You know your destiny! Do not provoke my fury, without a
foresight of the consequences!”

I will enter into little further detail of this my wretched
imprisonment in the wilds of Hungary. It was not destitute of its
varieties; and I could, if I pleased, fill a volume with the artifices
and the violence of my gloomy superintendent. I could fill volumes
with the detail of the multiplied expedients, the furious menaces, the
gigantic starts and rhapsodies of passion, by which he alternately
urged me to compliance and concession. But I will not. I will bring
to an end the history of Bethlem Gabor; and then, having detailed the
surprising events that immediately followed it, will close the page
of St. Leon’s history for ever. I stood like a rock. Shut out from
all other gratifications, I at least resolved to accumulate in my own
person all the energies of resistance. If I were to unfold the story, I
could command the reader’s astonishment, his admiration; but the object
of these papers is to record, not my merits, but my fate.

How different was my imprisonment in the cavern of the man-abhorring
palatine, from that which I had experienced in the dungeons of the
inquisition! There an inexorable apathy prevailed: my tyrants were
indifferent whether I died or lived; filled with the sense of their
religious elevation, they held on the even gravity of their course,
and counted my groans and my tears neither for remorse nor pleasure.
The variety I experienced in their dungeons was the growth of my own
thoughts: from without I encountered no interruption; it was not to
be ascribed to those who held me in durance, if my faculties were
not lethargied into death. Bethlem Gabor possessed no share of their
apathy; his malice was ever alive, his hatred ever ingenious and new
in its devices. He had a purpose to answer,--to extort from me the
supply of his necessities and projects. It was not so much perhaps that
he stood in need of this, as that he placed a pride in it, and had
fiercely resolved to show me that I was unreservedly his slave. His
animosity against me was so fixed and insatiable, that nothing that was
pain to me was indifferent to him. If at any time he saw me subsiding
into insensibility, he failed not to exert himself to sting me into
life again.

The consequence of this was somewhat different from what Bethlem Gabor
expected. Desponding as I was, weary of life, and almost finally
alienated from the all-coveted gift of the philosopher’s stone, if
he had left me to myself, I should very probably have sought in
insensibility relief from the torment of my own thoughts. But he
taught me a better lesson. Refusing me the indulgence of torpor, he
obliged me to string myself to resistance. He gave me a passion; he
gave me an object; he gave me comparative happiness. I was roused
to opposition; I was resolved that, placed, as I seemed to be, at
his mercy, I would yield him no atom of his desires. Thus employed,
I found in my employment pride. Perpetual occasion presented itself
for fortitude; and I gradually ascended to the sweets of consistency,
perseverance, and self-gratulation. I had for years been inured to
satisfy myself with a sparing stock of pleasures; and I was less at
a loss to expand and ramify those which I now possessed, than almost
any other man would have been in my situation. If my attendant train
of sensations was scanty, Bethlem Gabor took care to afford them a
perpetual supply of food and employment, and I was comparatively little
exposed to the pain of vacuity. When he saw that I was inflexible, and
that he could no longer gain from me the smallest compliance with his
will, he raged against me with terrifying fury. Was it a crime in me,
that this fury in my tyrant produced the operation of a sedative and
a cordial? There was no malignity in the joy it gave me. I had much
aversion for Bethlem Gabor, but no hatred. I took no pleasure in his
agonies, because they were agonies. My sympathies towards him now, I
confess, were small; but the joy I felt was because his fury told me,
was the unwilling evidence of my own value. I left him to assail the
mound I opposed to his desires as he pleased; it remained strong and
unaffected as the sea-beaten promontory.--From the inefficacy of his
efforts, I sometimes took occasion to remonstrate with my jailor, and
demand the restoration of my liberty; but Bethlem Gabor was not a man
whom arguments and expostulations like these could move. In spite of
himself however I commanded his wonder, if not his esteem. He regarded
the contrast as almost incredible, between the boy-aspect under which
he saw me, and the inflexibility and resources of my time-instructed
mind.

The contentment that I have here described in myself, was however a
creature of the imagination, the forced progeny of uncommon effort.
It was no natural state of the soul. My mind would sometimes wander
beyond the limits of my cavern, and remember that there were other
persons beside Bethlem Gabor and myself in the world. I recollected the
situation in which I had left my great project for the reviviscence
of Hungary, and rejoiced to remember that it was already in such
forwardness, as, I hoped, no longer to stand in absolute need of my
assistance. Yet what I had done was but a small portion, a dismembered
branch, of what I had meditated to do, and what every person of a
generous and enterprising mind, who had been in possession of the
philosopher’s stone, would have designed. Why was I thus stopped in the
commencement of a career so auspiciously begun, and to which an ardent
fancy, would prescribe no limits? Why was every power of the social
constitution, every caprice of the multitude, every insidious project
of the noble, thus instantly in arms against so liberal and grand an
undertaking? Nor could I help repining at the perverseness of my fate,
which had decreed that I should savour all the bitterness incidentally
resulting from my plan, and not be permitted so much as to taste the
applause and reward that ought to grow out of its completion. Thousands
of men were at this instant indebted to my generosity and exertions for
every blessing they enjoyed; and I was cast forth as the refuse of the
earth, pining under the alternate succession of solitude, negligence,
and malice, my very existence and the manner of it unknown, except
to one individual, who had, from the strangest and most unexpected
motives, sworn eternal hostility to me.

Bethlem Gabor had resolved that, so long as he lived, I should remain
a prisoner: when he died, if he continued my only jailor, the single
individual acquainted with the place of my confinement, the probable
issue was that I should perish with hunger. Twelve years before, I
should have contemplated this attitude and condition of existence with
indescribable horror. But within that time I had been better taught.
I had received an education, I thank them, in the dungeons of the
Spanish inquisition; and, if that be properly considered, it will not
be wondered at that I was superior to ordinary terrors. Early in my
present situation the presentiment had suggested itself to me that, by
some striking event, I should be rescued from my present confinement;
and, improbable as the suggestion was, it made an indelible impression
on my mind. I had originated in, or it had produced, a dream, the
scenes of which had appeared particularly luminous and vivid. I
imagined I saw a knight, cased complete in proof, enter my prison. A
smile of angelic kindness beamed on his countenance. He embraced me
with ardour; he made a sign to me to follow him. I felt that I had seen
him somewhere, that he had been my intimate friend. Yet all the efforts
I made in sleep, or afterwards when I was awake, were unavailing to
remove the mystery that hung upon his features. I rose to obey him;
the ground trembled under my feet like an earthquake. Presently, with
the incoherency usually attendant on a dream, the figure changed to
that of a female of unblemished grace and beauty; it unfolded a pair of
radiant wings; we ascended together in the air; I looked down, and saw
the castle of Bethlem Gabor a prey to devouring flames.--Here ended my
dream. I soon felt that I could reason myself out of all confidence in
the presages of this wild and incongruous vision. But I refused to do
it; my consolations were not so plenteous in this frightful solitude
as that I should willingly part with one so delicious. Reason, thus
applied, I contemplated as an abhorred intruder. It was, for a long
time, part of my occupation in every day to ruminate on this vision,
not with the sternness of a syllogist, but with the colouring of a
painter, and the rapture of a bard. From thus obstinately dwelling on
it in the day, it happened that it became again and again and again
my vision of the night. Slumbers like these were truly refreshing,
and armed and nerved me for the contentions of my tyrant. Sacred and
adorable power of fancy, that can thus purify and irradiate the damps
of a dungeon, and extract from midnight glooms and impervious darkness
perceptions more lovely and inspiriting than noontide splendour!




CHAPTER XLII.


I had now continued here for several months, and in all that time
had received no external impressions but such as related to the cell
I inhabited, and the misanthropical savage by whom it was visited.
One evening that Bethlem Gabor entered my dungeon, I observed in him
an air of unusual disturbance. Where apathy reigns, the intercourse
between those over whom it presides will be marked with a death-like
uniformity; but wherever the furious passions take their turn,
they will occasionally subside into a semblance of familiarity and
benevolence. There was something in the countenance of my tyrant that
made me for a moment forget the complicated injuries I had received
from him. “What is it that has disturbed you?” cried I. There was
no answer. There was a knitting in his brow, and a contraction in
his features, that showed me his silence was an effort. He departed
however, and had already passed the threshold of my dungeon. The door
was in his hand. He returned. “Chatillon,” said he, “perhaps you will
never see me more!”

“My castle is besieged. I have passed through dangers of a thousand
names, and I ought not to be made serious by that which now assails me.
But a gloomy presentiment hangs upon my mind. The busy phantom of life
has lasted too long, and I am sick at heart. In the worst event I will
not be made a prisoner; I will die fighting.

“I feel as if this were the last day of my existence; and, upon the
brink of the grave, animosity and ferociousness die away in my soul.
In this solemn moment, my original character returns here (striking his
heart) to take possession of its native home; a character, stern and
serious, if you will; but not sanguinary, not cruel, not treacherous or
unjust. Between you and me there is a deadly antipathy; but you did not
make yourself; you intended me friendship and advantage; the sufferings
you have experienced from me in return have been sufficiently severe.
If I die defending my walls, and you remain thus, you will perish with
hunger. I had intended it should be so; but I am now willing to remit
this part of your fate. I will enter into a compromise with you; I will
trust to your fidelity, and your honour. I will take off your chains; I
will bring you a timepiece and torches; I will leave with you the key
of the spring lock of your cavern,--provided you will engage your word
to me that you will not attempt to make use of your advantages till the
expiration of twenty-four hours.”

To these terms I assented without hesitation. The chains fell from my
wrists and my ancles; I stood up once more unshackled, and in respect
of my limbs a free man. When Bethlem Gabor was on the point to depart,
my soul melted within me. I took hold of his hand; my fingers trembled;
I grasped and pressed the fingers of my tyrant. I cannot describe what
then passed in my bosom. No man can understand my sensations, who had
not been in my situation, who had not passed through a treatment,
arbitrary, ferocious, and inhuman, and had not then seen the being
who had wounded him so unpardonably, suddenly changing his character,
commiserating his fate, and rescuing him from destruction.

From this time I saw Bethlem Gabor no more; he died, as he had sworn to
do, in the last dike of his fortress. His self-balanced and mighty soul
could not submit to the condition of a prisoner; he was nothing, if he
were not free as the air, and wild as the winds. I may be mistaken;
but this appears to me to have been a great and admirable man. He had
within him all the ingredients of sublimity; and surely the ingredients
of sublimity are the materials of heroic virtue. I have much cause of
complaint against him; he conceived towards me an animosity the most
barbarous and unprovoked; but, in writing this narrative, I have placed
my pride in controlling the suggestions of resentment, and I have
endeavoured to do him justice.

I had engaged to wait twenty-four hours; I waited only six. I know not
how the reader will decide upon the morality of my conduct; but I own I
had not the force, I believe I may call it the insensibility, to remain
in my dungeon any longer. There was no doubt that, if Bethlem Gabor
returned a conqueror, the term of my imprisonment would be renewed,
and all his former menaces continued in force. What should I deserve
to have thought of me, if I could sit down idly, and tamely wait the
return of my jailor? No! liberty is one of the rights that I put on
when I put on the form of a man, and no event is of power to dissolve
or abdicate that right. Of what validity was the promise that Bethlem
Gabor extorted from me by compulsion, and as the condition of that
which he had no title to withhold? What gratitude did I owe to this
man, who treated me with every contumely, and shrunk from nothing but
the thought of causing me to perish with hunger? Whatever became of
my attempt to escape, I could at least in this vast subterranean hide
myself from the face of him who had injured me. I had a provision of
phosphorus in my chest; and could therefore extinguish my torch upon
the slightest alarm, and relume it at pleasure. What was the value
of life, situated as I was situated? It was better to perish in the
attempt to escape, than linger on for ever in perpetual imprisonment.
As a further resource I left a billet in my dungeon (for for this
also I had implements) intreating Bethlem Gabor by every motive of
compassion and humanity to provide for me the means of sustenance as
usual. Having taken these precautions, I lighted a fresh torch; and,
unlocking the door, and thrusting the key into my girdle, set out upon
my expedition. Though Bethlem Gabor had stipulated for twenty-four
hours, the siege might even now be over, and I trembled every instant
lest my jailor should return.

I wandered for a considerable time among the alleys and windings of
this immeasurable cavern. I had the precaution to mark the sides of
the vault with characters and tokens as I passed, that, if necessary,
I might be able to find the way back to my dungeon: this might prove
an indispensable resource, to prevent me from perishing with hunger.
Once or twice I changed my route, inferring from a comparison of
circumstances, the best I could make, that I was not in the direction
of the castle from which Bethlem Gabor had led me to my imprisonment.
In all this wandering I had seen nothing, I had heard nothing, which
could demonstrate to me that I was approaching the habitation of man. I
had groped my way for near two hours, when on a sudden I heard a loud
and tremendous shout that almost stunned me, and that from its uncommon
shock could be at no great distance from the place where I stood.
This was succeeded by a terrifying glare of light. I extinguished my
torch, both that I might be better qualified to observe, and that I
might be less in danger of discovery by any one who should approach me
unawares. The shouts were several times repeated. The light I found to
proceed from that end of the vault towards which I had been advancing,
and, by the best conjectures I could form, I concluded the outlet
into the castle to be at no great distance. I heard the crackling of
the flames, and the fall of rafters and beams. Presently I discerned
a volume of smoke approaching me, and found that, if I remained long
in my present station, I should incur the risk of being suffocated.
I formed my resolution. I concluded that Bethlem Gabor’s castle was
taken, and set on fire by the Austrians. I believed that my persecutor
was already no more: to this faith I was undoubtedly prompted by the
presentiment which he had communicated to me. I saw that it would be
impossible for me to emerge into light, till the flames should abate. I
once more therefore lighted my torch, and returned by the straightest
road I could find to my dungeon. Arrived there, I proposed to pass the
interval quietly, in the cavern where I had so long felt the weight of
the Hungarian’s chains. Suddenly however the suggestion occurred to
me, may not my conjectures be false? may not Bethlem Gabor yet repel
the enemy, and return to me from amidst the ruins of his falling
castle? The thought was sickness and extinction to my heart. Hope!
beautiful as are thy visions, in how much anguish and agony do they
clothe the terrors of disappointment! Never had Bethlem Gabor been half
so dreadful to me as now. I shrunk away; I took with me the fragments
of provision that yet remained; I hid myself; I deemed no cell remote
enough to conceal me from the inhuman persecution of my tyrant.

I continued in the subterranean all that day and all the succeeding
night. Once in this period I attempted to reconnoitre the avenue of my
escape, but I found the situation still so heated and suffocating that
I did not venture to proceed. At length I came forth from this den of
horrors, and again beheld the light of the sun. The path had already
been sufficiently explored by me, and I no longer found any material
obstacles. I now saw that my conjectures were true: the castle of my
ferocious adversary was a pile of ruins. The walls indeed for the
most part remained, but choked with fragments of the falling edifice,
blackened with the flames, and penetrated in every direction by the
light of day. With difficulty I climbed over the ruins, which opposed
my egress from the subterranean, and rendered my passage to the outside
of the castle an affair of peril and caution. Here the first object
that struck me was some tents, probably of the soldiers who had been
employed in this work of destruction. I was hailed by a sentinel, and
I demanded that he would conduct me to his commander. He led me to
the centre of the little encampment, and I stood in the presence of
his chief. I lifted my eye to behold him, and was petrified with such
astonishment as till that hour I had never felt. It was Charles, my
son, my only son, the darling of his mother, the idol of my soul!




CHAPTER XLIII.


It may seem extraordinary that I should instantly have known him. He
was sitting at a table, covered with papers, and with one or two
aides-de-camp waiting to receive his orders. He was clothed in complete
armour, and his casque was resting on the ground by his side. When
I entered, his eye was fixed on a despatch that day received from
the great palatine of Hungary; but, in little more than a minute, he
raised his head, and his countenance was completely presented to my
view. It was fifteen years since I had beheld it; he was then scarcely
above half his present age, a mere stripling, in whom the first blush
of manhood had awakened the sentiment of independence and an honour
impatient of a shade; he was now a leader of warlike bands, his
complexion olived over with service, and his eye rendered steady with
observation and thought. But I knew him; I knew him in a moment. My
soul, with the rapidity of lightning, told me who he was. Not all the
arts in the world could have hid him from me; not all the tales that
delusion ever framed could have baffled me; I could have challenged him
against the earth!

I have already had occasion to explain the complexity of my feelings,
when, after a long absence, I visited the heiresses of the house of St.
Leon. The sweets of recognition, that transporting effervescence of the
mind, where the heart bounds to meet a kindred heart, where emotions
and tears mingle in speechless encounter, where all is gazing love and
strict embrace,--these pleasures were denied me. I stood stiff and
motionless in the presence of my child. My heart might burst; but it
must not, and it could not communicate its feelings.

After an instant’s pause of overwhelming sensation, I sunk back on
myself, and considered my own figure. It happened that, exactly
opposite to me, in the tent of my son, hung his armour, and over
the rest his polished shield, in which I saw my own person clearly
reflected. The youth of my figure indeed was still visible; but the
hardships of my dungeon had imprinted themselves in glaring characters
on my face. My beard was neglected, my hair was matted and shaggy,
my complexion was of a strong and deadly yellow. My appearance to a
considerable degree told my story without the need of words. Charles
enquired of those who brought me, where they had found this wretched
and unhappy figure; and was told that I had been seen a few minutes
before coming out from the ruins of Bethlem Gabor’s castle. He humanely
and naturally concluded, that I was a victim on whom the tyrant had
exercised his ferocity, and that I had been shut up in some dungeon of
the fortress: it was impossible that any person above ground in the
castle should have come out alive from the operation of the flames. He
commanded that I should be led to a neighbouring tent and taken care
of. After having been refreshed with food and rest, and attired with
other apparel, he directed that I should be brought to him again, that
he might hear my story.

Under these circumstances there was nothing for which I was more
anxious, than that I might recruit myself, and shake off as quickly as
possible the effects of my confinement. Cordials were brought me, and
I tasted of them: I bathed in a neighbouring stream: one of my son’s
attendants removed my beard, and arranged my hair. I now desired to be
left alone, that I might take some needful repose. I could not sleep;
but I reclined my limbs upon a couch, and began to collect my thoughts.

I saw myself in one hour the sport of the most complete reverse of
fortune that could happen to a mortal. I had been the prisoner of a
cavern so wild and pathless, as almost to defy the utmost extent of
human sagacity to explore its recesses. From this cavern, but for the
sudden and extraordinary event which had just occurred, I could never
have come forth alive. All sober calculation would have taught me to
expect that I should have remained there, chained up like a savage
tiger in his cage, as long as Bethlem Gabor existed; and that, when
he died, I should perish, unheard, unknown; no creature that lived
suspecting my situation, no lapse of ages ever bringing to light my
dismal catastrophe. The remorse and relenting of Bethlem Gabor towards
me seemed so little to accord with any thing that I had personally
witnessed of his habits and his mind, that even now I feel myself
totally unable to account for it. As it was however, I was once again
free. From the state of an outlaw imprisoned for life, I suddenly saw
myself at large, inspirited by the light of the sun, and refreshed
by his genial rays, in the full possession of youth and all its
faculties, enabled to return amidst my clients of Buda, or to seek
some new adventure, in any corner of the earth to which my inclination
led me. There is no man, however overwhelmed with calamities, however
persecuted with endless disappointment, however disgusted with life and
all its specious allurements, to whom so sudden and admirable a change
would not convey some portion of elasticity and joy.

But there was one thought that entirely occupied me. I cannot describe
how my soul yearned towards this my only son: the sentiment, even now
as I write, is an oppression I am scarcely able to sustain. Willingly,
most willingly, would I have traversed every region of the globe, if
so I might have discovered his unknown retreat: and now suddenly,
without the smallest effort on my part, he was placed before me. His
last solemn parting, his abjuration of my society and intercourse for
ever, rose to my memory, and gave a zest inexpressible to our present
encounter. At the thought that my son was in the neighbouring tent, all
earthly objects beside faded from my mind, and appeared uninteresting
and contemptible. I instantly resolved to devote myself to his service,
and to place all my enjoyment in the contemplation of his happiness,
and the secret consciousness of promoting it. He had, if I may so
express myself, in my own person forbidden me his presence: in my
now altered figure I might disobey his injunction without fearing
his rebuke. Let not the reader condemn me, that, endowed as I was
with unlimited powers of action, I preferred a single individual, my
own son, to all the world beside. Philanthropy is a godlike virtue,
and can never be too loudly commended, or too ardently enjoined; but
natural affection winds itself in so many folds about the heart, and
is the parent of so complicated, so various and exquisite emotions,
that he who should attempt to divest himself of it, will find that he
is divesting himself of all that is most to be coveted in existence.
It is not a selfish propensity; on the contrary, I will venture to
affirm that the generosity it breathes is its greatest charm. Beside,
in my case I considered my own existence as blasted; and I could
therefore find nothing better than to forget myself in my son. I had
made a sufficient experiment of the philosopher’s stone, and all my
experiments had miscarried. My latest trials in attempting to be
the benefactor of nations and mankind, not only had been themselves
abortive, but contained in them shrewd indications that no similar plan
could ever succeed. I therefore discarded, for the present at least,
all ambitious and comprehensive views, and believed that I ought to be
well content, if I could prove the unknown benefactor of the son of
Marguerite de Damville. I entered into a solemn engagement with myself
that I would forget and trample upon every personal concern, and be
the victim and the sacrifice, if need were, of the happiness of my
child. Dismissing my project of becoming a factor for the Hungarian
people, I determined to lay aside the name of Chatillon, and cut off
every indication that might connect my present existence with that of
the rich stranger of Buda. One of the advantages I possessed for that
purpose was, that no creature in Hungary had the slightest suspicion
that the sieur de Chatillon had ever been the prisoner of Bethlem Gabor.

Having thus arranged my thoughts, I now called for the garments that
had been assigned me. They were supplied me from the stock of my son;
and, when I had put them on, I overheard the attendants whispering to
each other their astonishment, at the striking resemblance between
their master and myself. When I came once more into the tent of their
captain, and stood as in the former instance before his shield, I did
not wonder at their remark. The coincidence of our features was so
great, that, had we passed through a strange place in each other’s
company, I should infallibly have been regarded as his younger brother.
Yet there was something of Marguerite in the countenance of Charles
that I wanted. When I recovered, as in a short time afterwards I did,
my vigour and health, I was more blooming than he; but there was
something graceful, ingenuous and prepossessing in his aspect, which
I could by no means boast in an equal degree, and which might have
carried him unhurt and honoured through the world. We shall see some
of the effects of this in what I shall presently have occasion to
relate.

When my son required of me to declare who I was, I told him, as I had
already determined to do, that I was a cadet of the house of Aubigny
in France; that, after having passed through several other countries,
I had come into Poland with the floating and half formed purpose of
entering as a volunteer against the Turk; but that, before my plan
was completely arranged, having been led, by my juvenile ardour in
a hunting party, far within the frontier of Hungary, I had been so
unfortunate as to become a prisoner to the troopers of Bethlem Gabor.
I added that, when introduced to their chief, I had given him so much
offence, by the firmness of my manner, and my refusing to comply with
certain propositions he made me, that he had thrust me into a dungeon,
from which, but for the gallant exertions of the present detachment, I
should never have come out alive.

Charles heard my story with attention and interest. He called on me to
resume my courage and my hopes, and to be confident that my sufferings
were now at an end. He told me, that he was a Frenchman as well as
myself, and like myself, had been a soldier of fortune. He felt,
he said, a powerful sympathy in my tale; there was something in my
countenance that irresistibly won his kindness; and, if I would put
myself under his protection, he did not doubt to be the means of my
future success. He spoke with great asperity of Bethlem Gabor, who,
as an intrepid, indefatigable and sanguinary partisan, had been the
author of greater mischiefs to the Christian cause, than any of the
immediate servants of the sultan of Constantinople. He congratulated
himself that the same action that had delivered the world from so
murderous a renegado, had rendered him the preserver of a youth of so
much enterprise and worth, as he doubted not I should prove. He said,
there was but one other man in Hungary, who had been so effectual an
enemy to the cause of truth and Christianity as Bethlem Gabor. The name
of this man he understood was Chatillon, and he grieved to say that
he bore the appellation of a Frenchman. To the eternal disgrace of the
nation that gave him birth, he had joined the Turkish standard, and, by
exertions difficult to be comprehended, had rescued the infidels from
famine at a time when, but for his inauspicious interference, Buda,
and perhaps every strong town in Hungary, were on the point of falling
into the hands of the Christians. It was this same man who had revived
the resources of Bethlem Gabor, after they had once before, by his
own fortunate exertions, been routed out; and whom I might therefore
in some sense consider as the author of my calamities, as well as the
inveterate foe of Christendom. Such a wretch as this was scarcely
entitled to the common benefit of the laws of war: and he would not
answer for himself if Chatillon had fallen into his power, to what
extremity his holy resentment against this degenerate fellow-countryman
might have hurried him. Providence however had overtaken him in his
impious career; and he had fallen obscurely, as he had lived basely, in
a night skirmish with a party of marauders from the Austrian camp.--The
reader may believe that I did not a little rejoice that, in announcing
myself a few moments before, I had taken the name, not of Chatillon,
but D’Aubigny. What I heard however occasioned in me a profound
reflection on the capriciousness of honour and fame, and the strange
contrarieties with which opposite prejudices cause the same action to
be viewed. I could not repress the vehemence of my emotions, while
I was thus calumniated and vilified for actions, which I had firmly
believed no malice could misrepresent, and fondly supposed that all
sects and ages, as far as their record extended, would agree to admire.

In another point of view, the invective which my son thus unconsciously
poured in my ears, had the effect of making me regard with a more
complacent satisfaction the plan I had formed of devoting myself to
his service. Here I pursued no delusive meteor of fame; the very
essence of my project lay in its obscurity. Kings and prelates,
armies and churches, would no longer find an interest in disputing
about my measures; I should indulge the secret promptings of my soul,
undisturbed alike by the censure of the world, and its applause. It
was thus that, under every change of fortune, I continued to soothe my
soul with delusive dreams.

Meanwhile my project went on with the happiest auspices. The friendship
between me and Charles continued hourly to increase. As a Frenchman,
whom chance had introduced to his acquaintance in a distant country,
it was natural that he should feel a strong bias of affection towards
me. But that sort of fraternal resemblance which the most inattentive
spectator remarked in us, operated forcibly to the increase of
Charles’s attachment. He would often, in the ingenuous opening of his
soul towards me, call me his brother, and swear that I should for
ever experience from him a brother’s love. Charles had by this time
completed the thirty-second year of his age; I was, in appearance, at
least ten years younger than he. There is something in this degree of
disparity, that greatly contributes to the cultivation of kindness,
and is adapted to the engendering a thousand interesting sentiments.
Frequently would he exclaim, “Our fortunes, my dear Henry,” that was
the name I assumed, “have been in a considerable degree similar: we
were both of us early cast on the world; I indeed at the immature age
of seventeen. I entered the world without an adviser or a friend;
but my destiny was favourable, and I escaped its quicksands and its
rocks. I have now by a concurrence of happy circumstances obtained a
place among honourable men and soldiers, and for what is to come may
reasonably regard myself with some degree of confidence. You are yet
in one of the most dangerous periods of human life; your work is all
to do; your battles are yet to fight. Suffer me, my dear friend, to
represent your better genius, and act an elder brother’s part. You
shall find me no ignorant Mentor, and no ungentle one.”

Nothing could be more gratifying to me than to see the shoots of
affection thus springing up spontaneously in Charles’s bosom. I
willingly humoured the generous deception that he was putting on
himself, and heard with transports inconceivable his assurances of
kindness and protection. We rode, and we walked together; we were in
a manner inseparable. When he went out to reconnoitre, I was his
chosen companion; when he inspected the discipline and condition of his
soldiers, he applied that opportunity to initiate me in the science of
war; when he expected to encounter the enemy, he placed me immediately
by his side.

Sometimes he would open his heart to me, and dwell with a melancholy
delight upon his secret sorrows. “It is no wonder, my Henry,” he would
say, “that I feel this uncommon attachment to you. I am alone in the
world. I have no father, no mother, and no brethren. I am an exile
from my country, and cut off for ever from those of my own lineage and
blood. It is with inexpressible delight that I thus cheat the malice
of my fate, and hold you to my bosom as if you were indeed my brother.
I would not part with the fiction for the mines of Peru; and I know
not whether I do not cultivate it more assiduously, and regard it
with a sentiment of more anxiety and zeal, because it is a fiction,
than I should do if it were a reality. I had indeed,” added Charles,
“a mother!”--And, when he had started this theme, he would dwell for
ever on her praises. I easily saw that never son loved a mother more
cordially, than Charles loved the all-accomplished Marguerite. With
what sentiments did I hear her eulogium? I could not join in her
praises; I could not be supposed to know her. I stood there, as the
statue of Prometheus might have done, if, after being informed with a
living soul, the Gods had seen fit to chain its limbs in everlasting
marble. The passion within me panted and laboured for a vent; but I
was invincibly silent. With what sentiments did I hear her eulogium?
Every word of it was a dagger to my heart; every word said, “And thou,
villain, wert not thou her murderer?” more painfully, than the fiercest
reproaches could have done.

When Charles had celebrated with an eloquence truly divine this
incomparable mother, a sudden pang of memory would make him start into
rage.----“And this mother I left! Of this mother I cannot tell whether
she is alive or dead! What shall I say? the crime, or the not less
fatal error of my father, separated me from this mother! I loved my
father: I loved him because he was my father; I had great obligations
to him; he once had virtues. But my mother,--if I could have found her
in the wildest desert of Africa, and have known her virtues, a stranger
to my blood, descended from the remotest tribe of the human race, I
should have chosen her for my friend, my preceptress and my guide,
beyond all that youth and beauty, with their most radiant charms, could
tender to my acceptance!”

Thus unconsciously, yet ingeniously, did my dear son from time to
time torture his father’s heart. I could not even deliver him from
the gloomy and wretched uncertainty, whether this mother were alive
or dead. With one word I could have composed his soul into a sober
grief; I could have said, Your adorable mother at length rests from her
sorrows; she is no longer the victim of a misguided and a cruel father;
you have no longer occasion to brood over that most disconsolate of
reflections, “I know not what anguish may be at this moment suffered by
her who is entitled to all my duty and all my affection.” With one word
I might have told this; and that word I dared not utter.




CHAPTER XLIV.


My son related to me his history, and made me the depository of his
feelings and reflections. The name of St. Leon indeed never passed
his lips; I felt that he had consigned that to inviolable oblivion.
The appellation he bore in the army was the chevalier de Damville.
Soon after he abandoned me at Dresden, he had entered as a volunteer
in the imperial army. Charles the Fifth was at that time assembling
forces to encounter the confederates of the league of Smalcalde. In
this situation my son was eminently fortunate. He was distinguished for
uncommon enterprise and courage in some of the first actions of the
war, and early attracted the notice of Gian-Battista Castaldo, count
of Piadena, who held an eminent command under the emperor. In this
army my son was a party to the decisive battle of Muhlberg, in April,
1547. Four years afterwards, Castaldo was appointed commander in chief
against the Turks in Hungary, and the French chevalier accompanied
his patron to this new scene of military enterprise. Charles had felt
dissatisfied with the grounds and motives of war between the Catholics
and Protestants of Germany, men worshipping the same Saviour, and
appealing to the same authorities, but many of them at least, from the
most upright and ingenuous scruples, differing in their interpretation
of those authorities. But, in their contentions between the crescent
and the cross, he entered with unbounded enthusiasm into all the
feelings that constitute a champion or a martyr. He conceived that
whatever was dear to the human race in this world or the next hung
on the issue; he regarded the grandeur of the cause as purifying his
efforts and consecrating his name; and, when he lifted his sword in
vindication of an expiring God, he felt himself steeled with more than
mortal energy.

My son dwelt on the merits of his patron with a degree of veneration
and love that knew no bounds. Castaldo was ranked by the consenting
voice of mankind with the most accomplished generals of the age in
which he lived. “I knew him,” said Charles, “in his most private
hours, and stood next to and observed him in the greatest and most
critical occasions of his life. It was the least of his merits that
he distinguished me, that he took me up friendless and an orphan,
that under every circumstance he was more than a father to me; that
he corrected my faults, that he guided me with his advice, that he
instructed me with his wisdom, and supported me by his countenance.
Castaldo was the most persevering and indefatigable of mankind; no
difficulties could undermine his apparent serenity; no accumulation
of dangers could appal or perplex him. Victory never robbed him of
his caution; misfortune and defeat never destroyed the grandeur and
elasticity of his soul. I firmly believe that no general had ever a
more discouraging variety of counteractions to struggle with. The
enemy was barbarous and sanguinary, yet firm and undismayed, in the
full vigour of their political health, under the rule of the ablest of
their sovereigns. The nobles of the country Castaldo had to defend had
almost all of them been alienated, one after another, by the tricking
and ill-judged politics of the house of Austria. The nation was ruined,
houseless and starving. Many of the officers who served under my
general were the basest of poltroons; but they were imposed upon him
by his court; he was compelled to place them in important trusts; and,
even when in the most dastardly way they betrayed those trusts, they
were by some pitiful intrigue sheltered from his discipline and his
justice. The forces of Castaldo were mutinous and ungovernable; and he
was almost constantly denied the funds requisite for their pay.

“For two years the count of Piadena struggled with these complicated
difficulties. When he had obtained a hard-earned advantage at
one extremity of the kingdom, he found it rendered useless by
some treachery or incapacity in the other extremity, which it was
instantly necessary he should hasten to repair. He quelled four
alarming mutinies by his firmness, his resources, and the prudent
combination of his calmness and severity. In the midst of one of his
most arduous situations he suddenly received intelligence that the
states of Hungary, which were at that time assembled, were debating
whether they should enter into a treaty with Solyman for the purpose
of placing their country under the Turkish sceptre. He immediately
flew to the place of council; the decision in favour of Solyman was
drawn up and ready to be adopted; but Castaldo, by his presence, his
authority, and his eloquence, recalled the states to their duty, and
prevented them from eternally staining the Christian name. Surrounded
with these difficulties, opposed to an enemy many times more numerous
than the forces he could bring against them, and whose wants were all
plentifully supplied, Castaldo by his single abilities kept the balance
even, or rather caused it to incline in favour of the Christian scale.
But what,” added Charles, “avails the most consummate merit! How may
the most incessant and undaunted exertions be shadowed by the veil of
obscurity! The world judges by events; success is necessary to procure
the palm of fame. After two years of such labours as I witnessed and
glory to describe, a mutiny broke out among the mercenary troops,
more formidable than any that preceded; it was no longer even in the
abilities of Castaldo to quell. ‘We honour and respect you,’ said the
mutineers, ‘but we will no more serve without pay: we have been baffled
two years; we will march to the gates of Vienna, and demand from
Ferdinand, our sovereign, why we are thus denied the arrears that are
due to us.’ They chose leaders for this expedition among themselves.
The great Castaldo, whose peculiar talent it is to accommodate himself
to events, and never by any misfortune to be deprived of his invention
and resources, saw what it was that became him. Having in vain tried
every method for retaining his troops in Hungary, he offered himself to
lead them to Vienna. Then was seen the true ascendancy of a noble mind.
Goaded with want and distress, they had been deaf to the remonstrances
of their general when he sought to direct them against the enemy. But,
when they saw him submitting himself to their rage and impatience, and
fearlessly intrusting his safety to those who had before refused even
to listen to him, and who had reason to fear his retribution as their
accuser and judge, they were awed and speechless. They almost repented
of their frenzy, and were half determined to return to their duty.
Their remorse indeed was imperfect and ineffectual; but Castaldo led
this band of mutineers through the heart of the kingdom, with as many
symptoms of regularity, modesty, and order, as if they had been the
best paid, the promptest and most loyal army in the world.”

My son spoke in terms of the warmest enthusiasm of the defence of
Erlau, in the period of Castaldo’s last and most arduous campaign
against the Turks. In respect of fortifications the town was scarcely
competent to resist the feeblest enemy; but its deficiency in this
point was supplied by the constancy and valour of its garrison and
inhabitants. The very women displayed an enterprise, that the more
vigorous sex have seldom exhibited. In one instance, a heroine of this
sort was seen fighting in the presence of her mother and her husband.
Her husband fell dead by her side. “Let us, my daughter,” said the
mother, “remove the body, and devote the rest of our care to its
honourable funeral.”--“May God,” returned the impassioned widow, “never
suffer the earth to cover my husband’s corse, till his death has been
amply revenged; this is the hour of battle, not a time for funeral
and for tears!” So speaking, and seizing the sword and shield of the
breathless champion, she rushed upon the enemy; nor did she quit the
breach till, by the slaughter of three Turks who were ascending the
scaling ladders, she had appeased the fury in her breast, and the ghost
of her departed husband. Then raising the corpse, and pressing it to
her bosom, she drew it to the great church of the city, and paid to it
the last honours with all possible magnificence.[9] Many other examples
of a heroism not inferior to this were displayed on the same occasion.
“And shall I,” added Charles, in a sally of glorious enthusiasm, “ever
desert a cause which has been thus honoured? Shall I betray a soil
which has been immortalised by such illustrious actions? Shall I join
myself to the renegado Bethlem Gabor, and the execrable Chatillon? No:
such virtue as I have described never could have been conceived, but in
the bosom of truth! Great as is the pious devotion I feel for that God
who died on the cross for the salvation of mankind, I own my weakness,
if it be a weakness, his cause is scarcely less endeared to me by the
sublime exertions of his heroic followers, than by his own adorable
condescension and mercy.

“When the glorious Castaldo departed with his rebellious army for the
metropolis of Germany, there was nothing I more earnestly desired than
to accompany his march. For seven years he had conferred on me the
benefits, and shown towards me the affection, of a father; and I could
not think of being separated from him without the extremest anguish.
Beside, I regarded it as little less than sacrilege, to quit his side
at a time that he was exposed to the furious suggestions of a host of
robbers and banditti. But he would not allow me to abandon my post.
‘Some time,’ said he, ‘we must separate, and you must stand alone.
I have been long enough your instructor; and, if my lessons or my
example can produce improvement in you, they must have performed that
office already.’ He treated with disdain the thought of the danger to
which he might be exposed, and his need of a faithful guard; a thought
which he had detected in the midst of my anxieties, but which I had
not the courage to mention. ‘This,’ said he, ‘is your genuine sphere.
You are a young man, burning with the zeal of truth and religion. You
are inspired with the enthusiasm of a champion and a martyr. Heaven
knows how willingly I would have spent my blood for the overthrow of
Mahomet and his blasphemous impieties. To me this is not permitted; to
you it is. I shall be engaged in the painful scenes of civil contention
between Christian and Christian, misguided and inflamed by the human
inventions of Luther and of Calvin. You have before you a clearer and a
brighter field; and, I confidently persuade myself, you will be found
worthy of your happier destiny.’--The count of Piadena bestowed me, so
he was pleased to express himself, upon Nadasti, the great palatine of
the realm, as the most precious pledge of his friendship that it was in
his power to confer.

“Since the retreat of Castaldo, the Christian standard has obtained
little more either of attention or aid from our lawful sovereign, now
the possessor of the imperial throne. Ferdinand for a great part of
this time has had his negotiators at Constantinople, whom the insulting
Turk has condescended neither sincerely to treat with, nor to dismiss.
The Christian army in Hungary has been left to its own resources; but
zeal has supplied the place of magazines, and religious ardour has
taught us to omit no occasion of annoying and distressing the enemy.
The most considerable occurrence of this period, has been the siege
of Ziget about four years ago. Solyman, taking advantage of certain
factious broils among our hereditary nobility, appointed at that time
one of his eunuchs bashaw of Buda; and, having placed a numerous army
under his command, dismissed him from the foot of his throne with
this arrogant injunction, not to enter the capital of his province,
till he had first sent the keys of Ziget as an offering to his royal
master. Horvati, the Christian governor of this fortification, is one
of the most accomplished and the bravest of our native commanders;
and, Nadasti having sent him a reinforcement the better to enable him
to support the threatened siege, I was in the number of the soldiers
appointed on this service. The trenches were opened early in June,
and the siege continued for the space of seven weeks. The bashaw,
though an eunuch, in person stunted, and of monstrous deformity, was
distinguished for an uncommon degree of audacity and perseverance.
Four times he filled the dikes of the fortification with wood and
earth; and as often, by means of a furious sally of the besieged, the
materials, which had thus with vast expense of industry and labour
been accumulated, were set fire to and consumed. On the twelfth day
of the siege he gained possession of the town, and drove us back into
the citadel; but on the day following we recovered the ground we had
lost, and from that time the town was his no more. The actions of these
days were the severest of the whole siege; we fought the enemy street
by street, and inch by inch; the great fountain in the market-place
ran with blood; we ascended hills of the dead, which the infidels
opposed as a barrier to our further progress; I seized two Turkish
standards; and, though wounded, pursued the enemy through the eastern
gate, and returned in triumph. Nadasti in the sixth week of the siege
marched to our relief; but he was met and worsted by the bashaw, who
returned victorious to the foot of the walls. During the whole of the
siege mutual animosity was cherished by every species of contrivance,
and the heads of the distinguished dead were exhibited on both sides
as spectacles of abhorrence and terror. The inflamed passions of the
combatants several times found a vent in listed duels: Horvati, the
governor, killed in one of these encounters a gigantic Turk, who had
sent a proud defiance to our host. I procured myself honour upon a
similar occasion; and the scarf which I now wear, composed the turban
of the infidel I slew. At length the disappointed bashaw was obliged
to raise the siege; and he soon after died of grief and mortification
in his palace at Buda. I confess I recollect the Christian exploits
in the defence of Ziget, in which I also had a share, with rapture and
delight; they will serve to awaken in me new animation, when hereafter
the coldness of ordinary life might strike palsy to my soul. I shall
never think I have lived in vain, after having contributed, in however
humble a place, to arrest the career of insolence and impiety which,
under the standard of the crescent, threatened to over-run the whole
Christian world.”

Such were the adventures and such the sentiments of the gallant
chevalier de Damville. I had been a warrior in my youth, and
the discourse he held was sufficiently congenial to my earliest
propensities. I saw indeed that he had gained, in the zeal of a soldier
of the cross, a source of martial heroism, to which my military history
had been a stranger. But, though I could not entirely enter into
this sentiment of his, and indeed regarded it as an infatuation and
delusion, I did not the less admire the grandeur of soul with which
this heroic fable inspired him. There was no present propensity in my
heart that led me to delight in deeds of blood and war; I saw them
in their genuine colours without varnish or disguise; I hated and
loathed them from my very inmost soul; but, notwithstanding this, I was
sensible to the lustre which military zeal cast round the character of
my son. Nor is this incredible or absurd; the qualities of a generous
and enterprising champion are truly admirable, though the direction
they have received should be worthy of eternal regret.

Charles de Damville was my friend; and, when I say this, I cannot help
stopping a moment for the indulgence of reflecting on the contrast
between my present intercourse with my son, and my late connection
with Bethlem Gabor. I had sought the friendship of the Hungarian
partisan, partly because I wanted a protector and an ally, but partly
also because in my soul I looked up to and admired the man. I called
Bethlem Gabor my friend; I persuaded myself that I had cogent reasons
for calling him so. But there was little sympathy between us; he was
wrapped up in his own contemplations; he was withered by his own
calamities; our souls scarcely touched in a single point. No, no; this
is not friendship.

Friendship is a necessity of our nature, the stimulating and restless
want of every susceptible heart. How wretched an imposture in this
point of view does human life for the most part appear! With boyish
eyes, full of sanguine spirits and hope, we look round us for a friend;
we sink into the grave, broken down with years and infirmities, and
still have not found the object of our search. We talk to one man, and
he does not understand us; we address ourselves to another, and we find
him the unreal similitude only of what we believed him to be. We ally
ourselves to a man of intellect and of worth; upon further experience
we cannot deny him either of these qualities; but the more we know
each other, the less we find of resemblance; he is cold, where we are
warm; he is harsh, where we are melted into the tenderest sympathy;
what fills us with rapture, is regarded by him with indifference; we
finish with a distant respect, where we looked for a commingling soul:
this is not friendship. We know of other men, we have viewed their
countenances, we have occasionally sat in their society: we believe
it is impossible we should not find in them the object we sought.
But disparity of situation and dissimilitude of connections prove as
effectual a barrier to intimacy, as if we were inhabitants of different
planets.

It is one of the most striking characteristics of the nature of man,
that we are eternally apt to grow dead and insensible to the thing
we have not. Half our faculties become palsied, before we are in the
slightest degree aware that we are not what we were, and what we might
be. There are philosophers who regard this as the peculiar privilege
of man, a wise provision of Providence to render us contented and easy
with our lot in existence. For my part, I do not envy, and I have never
aspired to, the happiness of ignorance and stupidity. But, be it a
blessing or a curse, the phenomenon is undoubted. Present me with some
inestimable benefit, that my nature fitted me to enjoy, but that my
fortune has long denied me to partake, and I instantly rise as from an
oppressive lethargy. Before, it may be, I felt myself uneasy; but I
knew of no remedy, I dreamed it was my nature, I did not put forth a
finger for relief. But now, that I have drawn the unexpected prize, I
grow astonished at my former blindness; I become suddenly sensible of
my powers and my worth; the blood that slept in my heart, circulates,
and distends every vein; I tread on air; I feel a calm, yet ravishing
delight; I know what kind of an endowment life is, to a being in whom
sentiment and affection are awakened to their genuine action.

This was the effect of the mutual attachment produced between me and
Charles. I looked into him, and saw a man; I saw expansive powers of
intellect and true sensibility of heart. To be esteemed and loved
and protected by such a man; to have him to take one by the hand, to
enquire into one’s sorrows, to interest himself in one’s anxieties, to
exult in one’s good fortune and one’s joys; this and this only deserves
the name of existence.

I had however a painful drawback upon my satisfaction. It was my fate
since the visit of the stranger of the lake of Constance, to rejoice
for moments and to lament for years. I could not at first ascend to
that purity and eminence of friendship to forget myself; I could not
but painfully feel the contrast between me and my son. How happy
was Charles, how respectable, how self-approving, how cheerful of
heart: I shall presently have occasion to speak of a still further
addition to his happiness! I looked indeed young, fair, blooming, a
stranger to care: but I had a secret worm gnawing at my vitals. This
very deceitfulness of my countenance was a bitter aggravation to my
remorse. I never saw my features reflected in the polished shield
without feeling myself struck to the core. Charles had walked right
onward in the paths of honour; he feared no detection; he had no secret
consciousness that gave the lie to the voice of applause, partiality,
and friendship. But I was all a lie; I was no youth; I was no man; I
was no member of the great community of my species. The past and the
future were equally a burthen to my thoughts. To the eye that saw me I
was a youth flushed with hope, and panting for existence. In my soul
I knew, and I only knew, that I was a worn out veteran, battered with
the storms of life, having tried every thing and rejected every thing,
and discarded for ever by hope and joy. When I walked forth leaning on
the arm of him who delighted to call me his younger brother, this was
the consciousness that hunted my steps and blasted me with its aspect
whichever way we turned.




CHAPTER XLV.


Among the various confidences reposed in me by my son, one was his
love. The object of his attachment was a young lady of quality, named
Pandora, niece to Nadasti, great palatine of Hungary. In consequence of
the earnest recommendation of Castaldo in 1553, Nadasti had taken my
son under his particular protection, and Charles’s principal home at
the periods when the army was dispersed in winter-quarters was at the
palatine’s house in the city of Presburg. Here his manners had become
more polished, and his taste more refined. Till then, bred in tents,
and living amidst the clangour of arms, he had been a mere soldier,
rough, generous, manly, and brave. But Nadasti was an elegant scholar,
smitten with that ardent love of classical and ancient lore which
has so eminently distinguished the sixteenth century. He assembled
round him men of letters from various parts of Europe; and, under
his auspices, the days of Matthias Corvinus, king of Hungary, seemed
to be revived, whose love of literature was such, that he kept three
hundred transcribers in his house, constantly employed in multiplying
copies of the precious relics of Roman and Athenian learning. The
consort of Nadasti was one of the most accomplished matrons of the age
in which she lived, and her three daughters were patterns of every
polite and amiable accomplishment. Such was the school into which the
chevalier de Damville entered at the age of twenty-five, immediately
after the retreat of Castaldo. This may seem an age somewhat late
for new-modelling the character, but Charles had an enterprising and
aspiring temper; and he soon became a distinguished ornament of courts
and the society of ladies. Castaldo had taught him all he knew, the
temper, the manners, and the science of a military chieftain: the
palace of Nadasti finished and completed the education of my son.

Pandora was only fourteen years of age when Charles de Damville first
became a sort of inmate of the house of her uncle. She at that time
lived with her father; but he being afterwards killed in the battle
which Nadasti fought for the relief of Ziget, Pandora occupied an
apartment in the palatine palace. From the first hour he saw her, a
mere child as it were, accompanied by her governess, Charles confessed
to me that he had beheld her with eyes of distinction. He had said
to himself, This little girl will hereafter be a jewel worthy of the
crown of an emperor. He had found something inexpressibly attractive
in the starry brightness of her complexion; her air he regarded as
both lighter and more graceful than any thing he had ever before
seen; and her speaking and humid eye seemed to him the very emblem of
sensibility and sweetness. If, at the girlish and immature season of
fourteen, he had ascribed to her all these perfections, it will easily
be supposed that, as she increased in stature as the beauties of form
unfolded themselves in her, and she advanced in sentiment and a lovely
consciousness of her worth, the partiality of Charles became more deep
and unalterable. But the orphan niece of Nadasti was altogether without
a portion; and the great palatine would have seen with more complacency
the chevalier de Damville addressing his pretensions to one of his
daughters.

Charles confessed to me that the passion he nourished had been fruitful
of pleasures and griefs, of hope and perplexity. It was now almost a
year since Pandora and himself had confessed a mutual affection. The
confession had not been the result of design on either side: both had
wished to suppress it; Pandora from virgin dignity and reserve; and
Charles, because he saw not how their affection could be crowned with
success, and he dreaded, more than any misery to himself, to be the
author of degradation and misery to her he loved. But what is ever
uppermost in the heart will at some time or other betray itself. Their
sympathetic and accordant feelings upon a point so deeply interesting
to both, rendered them eagle-eyed to discern the smallest indications.
They had had a thousand opportunities, and a thousand opportunities
had been resisted. They became more than usually silent and reserved
towards each other; they shunned to meet, and, when they met, avoided
each other’s eyes. One day a casual encounter in a solitary retreat,
which each had sought principally with intention to escape the presence
of the other, had taken them off their guard. They were mutually
hesitating and perplexed; each discerned more unequivocal indications
than had ever occurred before of the state of the other’s sentiments;
the entire accord snapped as it were at once the chains of reserve; and
each, after a short interval of hesitation, spoke with an eloquence,
hitherto untried, the language of love. The difference of years between
them gave a zest to the communication. Pandora seemed to be throwing
herself upon the protection of an elder brother, of a guardian, one
in whose prudence she confided as the antidote of her inexperience;
Charles felt his maturer years as imposing on him more severely that
sacred integrity, the obligation of which, at least as society is at
present constituted, seems in the majority of cases to grow out of the
relative situation of the sexes, of the protectorship of the one, and
the dependence of the other.

“And now,” exclaimed Charles, “what am I to do? what am I to desire?
It would be affectation in me to conceal from myself on an occasion
like this, that the reputation I have acquired both in the arts of
peace and war is such, as to have caused Nadasti to set his heart
upon my becoming his son-in-law. The great palatine, though in many
respects generous and liberal, has that inflexibleness of opinion,
which is perhaps more apt to grow up in the hearts of scholars, than
in other departments of society. He is grave and solemn; all his
habits are of a majestic and lordly nature; and I have small reason
to hope that I shall find him accessible to my representations. He is
little subject to sallies of passion; his own propensities are wholly
under the control of his judgment; and it is not likely that he will
make allowance for the ardent affections of other minds. Pandora is
entirely dependent on him; in any case the portion she would receive
from him would be very inadequate to her worth; but, discarded and
discountenanced by him who has the absolute rule of Christian Hungary,
what can she expect? I am myself destitute of fortune; my provision
as a soldier will be very inadequate to the wants of the first and
softest of her sex. But even of that provision Nadasti will deprive
me, if I marry in opposition to his pleasure. Shall I make Pandora
the inhabitant of tents and encampments; shall I expose her to all
the changes and hazards of a military life; shall I drag her as the
attendant of a soldier of fortune through every climate of Europe? No,
by heavens! I should regard myself as the most selfish and the basest
of mankind, if I could deliberate on such a question. Never shall the
charmer of my soul owe a single privation to her Charles. I love her
with so pure and entire a passion, that I prefer her prosperity to
every earthly good. Nor is it merely necessary to my attachment that
she should live in plenty and ease; I require that my Pandora should
be seen in her native lustre, that she should be surrounded with every
appendage due to her merit, that she should command applause from the
mercenary, and homage from the superficial. Her praise is the only
music I enjoy. I could not bear to hear her name coupled with levity
and scorn. I could not bear that, where she appeared, every eye should
not be turned to her with reverence and honour. My passion, I confess
it, is that of a disciple of liberal arts and a nobleman, not that of
an Arcadian.”

The period of the campaign now drew to an end, and Charles, having
requested me to accompany him, set out for his usual winter retreat in
the city of Presburg. I saw Pandora. Never in my life had I beheld any
thing so sweetly simple. I had always been an admirer of the sex; but
the perfections of Pandora were of a nature that I had not observed in
any other woman. Her symmetry was so perfect, the pearly lustre of her
skin so admirable, and her form and carriage so light and ethereal,
that at first view it was difficult to persuade one’s self that she
was framed of the same gross materials as the rest of the species.
She seemed not constructed to endure the shocks of the world, and the
rude assaults of ill humour or neglect, of censure or adversity. Her
voice was of the sweetest, the clearest and softest tone I ever heard.
There was a peculiar _naïveté_ in her accents, that riveted your soul
in irresistible fetters. Her conversation, for in the sequel I enjoyed
much of her conversation, had a very uncommon zest. She seemed to
have no art, and what she uttered appeared as if wholly unchecked by
consideration or reserve. You were persuaded that she always delivered
without restraint the first thing that occurred to her mind; yet in
what she said there was so much good sense, so much true feeling, and,
as the occasion allowed, so much whim and imagination, that you could
not discover how any of her words could be changed but for a worse.
This circumstance strikingly contrasted with the childish simplicity,
or rather the feminine softness and sylph-like delicacy, of her manner
and her tone. The opposition of appearance between her and my son
made a strong impression upon me. He was a perfect soldier, with an
ample chest, broad shoulders, and a figure, though graceful and well
proportioned, yet so strong, that it seemed framed to contend with and
to conquer the wrestlers in the Grecian games. His complexion, shaded
with luxuriant curls of manly hair, was itself made brown with the
rigours of climate. Pandora was so heavenly fair, so sweetly delicate
and slender, that you would have thought she would be withered and
destroyed in his embrace, like the frailest ornament of the garden
before the northern breeze. But courage to choose what is rugged and
manlike is often characteristic of the softest of her sex.

I speedily contracted an intimate commerce with the beautiful Pandora.
I was naturally desirous to be as consummate a judge as possible of
those perfections, which I believed fated to determine the future
happiness of my son. When sufficiently satisfied in that respect,
I still continued the indulgence, and found a pure and exquisite
pleasure in the daily contemplation of accomplishments that were
to prove the materials of his gratification and delight, whose
gratification I preferred to my own. I had a still further view in this
commerce. I was anxious to be perfectly informed of the connections
and family of Pandora, that upon them I might build a project I had
deeply at heart, of bestowing on her, in the least questionable and
exceptionable manner, a dowry, that should place her upon an equality
with her cousins, the daughters of Nadasti, and deliver my son from
all apprehension of the unpleasing consequences to result from the
resentment of the great palatine. Nadasti was opulent, and the portions
of his daughters very considerable; and, however inclined, I could
not exceed this limit without risking the entire miscarriage of my
project. Charles thought nothing too rich either in situation or income
to do honour to the mistress of his soul; but, separately from this
enthusiastic sentiment, both he and Pandora had too just a taste, not
to prefer the simple majesty of ancient nobility, to the expensive
ostentations of modern refinement.

Having digested my plan I was obliged to travel as far as Venice for
the execution of it. The mother of Pandora had been a Venetian, and
the uncle of her mother was one of the adventurers who had sailed with
Pizarro for the conquest of Peru. He had died before the completion
of that business, and had left behind him no relative so near to him
in blood as the lovely Pandora. By a singular piece of good fortune,
I encountered at Venice an individual who had sailed in the same ship
with the young lady’s uncle. The uncle having died prematurely, the
share he might otherwise have obtained of the spoils of Peru was sunk
in the shares of the rest, and nothing was allowed to remain that
might have descended to his heirs. His friend and countryman I found,
though once rich with the booty he made, had by a series of calamities,
before he reached his native home, been reduced to a state of poverty.
The vicissitudes he experienced, had produced in him the effect of
a very uncommon eagerness for acquisition. This man I fixed on for
my instrument; I opened to him my plan, and offered him a very ample
gratification, provided he acted successfully the part I assigned him.
In concert with each other we digested and forged the various documents
that were best calculated to give credibility to the tale. Having
completed our arrangement, I set out for Presburg without a moment’s
delay, and directed my Venetian not to follow till after a stipulated
interval. He was not to enter into full possession of his reward till
he had completed the task he had undertaken. It was fixed that no
person in Hungary should be acquainted with my visit to Venice, but
only be allowed to understand generally, that I had been engaged for a
certain time in an excursion of amusement. So hard is the fate of the
possessor of the philosopher’s stone, and so limited his power, as to
have rendered all these precautions on my part indispensably necessary.
Had not the various circumstances concurred, the detail of which is
here stated, the birth of Pandora’s mother in a maritime state, the
expedition of Pizarro to Peru, her uncle’s engaging in this expedition
and dying before it was completed, and my own casual rencounter with
his _compagnon du voyage_, my project would too probably have been
baffled. A direct gift of the fortune I designed would never have been
admitted of; and, had not the coincidence been eminently favourable,
even though I should have succeeded in misleading every other party, I
could not hope to have eluded the perspicacity and jealous honour of my
son.

When I returned to Presburg, I again renewed my intercourse with
Pandora. The passion entertained by Damville for the beautiful orphan
was a secret to every person at court; they had managed so discreetly
as to have avoided every hint of suspicion; and, as it was universally
known that the great palatine had an eye on this gallant soldier for
one of his daughters, few persons entertained a doubt that my son would
speedily declare his election among the co-heiresses of Nadasti. On
the other hand, in the friendly intercourse between me and Pandora,
neither she nor myself felt that there was any thing to conceal, and
it was therefore a matter of complete notoriety. My blooming youth of
appearance was remarked; by the majority of bystanders we were judged
formed for each other; and, before I was aware, the beautiful Hungarian
was awarded to me by the general voice as my destined bride. When
however I became acquainted with the rumour, I was contented to smile
at it; the consciousness in my own breast how far the public sagacity
had wandered in its guess, gave to that guess, in my apprehension, a
certain air of whimsical and amusing.




CHAPTER XLVI.


Such was the situation of the affair of Pandora, and I daily looked
for the arrival of my Venetian confederate, when suddenly I remarked
an alteration in the carriage of my beautiful ally. She had hitherto,
on all occasions, sought my conversation; she now appeared sedulously
to avoid me. Her manner had been characterised by the gaiety, the
sprightliness and general good humour, incident to her age, and
congenial to her disposition. She was now melancholy. Her melancholy
assumed a tone correspondent to the habits of her mind, and was
peculiar and individual. It had an ingenuous and defenceless air,
inexpressibly calculated to excite interest. It seemed to ask, what
have I done to deserve to be melancholy? You felt for her, as for a
spotless lily depressed by the unpitying storm. You saw, that those
enchanting features were never made for a face of sorrow, and that that
bewitching voice ought never to have been modulated into an expression
of heaviness.

I was in the highest degree anxious to learn the cause of this
revolution, and was the farthest in the world from suspecting its real
foundation. I pursued Pandora with so much importunity, and demanded
an interview with such irresistible earnestness, that she at length
consented to grant it. We met in a remote part of the garden. “Why,
Henry,” said she, “do you thus persecute me? You are my evil genius,
the cause of the greatest calamity that could ever have overtaken me.”

I started. “For heaven’s sake, beautiful Pandora, what do you mean?”

“I love the chevalier de Damville. I have loved him long; he is dearer
to me than life; and he has cast me off for ever!”

“And am I the cause?”

“Yes, you, and you alone. I had for some time observed a change in
his behaviour, that he was uncommonly grave, serious, and reserved. I
endeavoured to soothe him; I redoubled my blandishments in our next
season of unreserved discourse; I tenderly enquired into the source of
his grief.

“For a long time he resisted my importunity. At length, ‘Faithless
girl,’ said he, ‘have you the cruelty to ask the meaning of my
depression? This is the extremity of insult. Is it not enough that
I know your inconstancy? Is it not enough that I have found you,
like the rest of your frivolous sex, the mere slave of your sense of
sight, regardless of vows, regardless of an affection which despised
all interests but that of tenderness and love, caught by the first
appearance of something younger, softer, and more courtly, than I
pretend or desire to be? Will nothing satisfy you but the confession
of my unhappiness from my own mouth? Do you require expostulation,
intreaty, and despair, from your discarded lover, to fill up the
measure of your triumph?’

“For a long time I was totally at a loss to apprehend my dear
chevalier’s meaning.

“‘No,’ continued he, ‘I am not jealous. There is no temper I hold in
such sovereign contempt as jealousy. I am not of a disposition easily
to conceive umbrage, or lightly to doubt the protestations of the woman
I adore. I have been blind too long. But I see that you are eternally
together. I see that you take advantage of the distance at which the
despotic temper of Nadasti keeps us from each other, to give all your
time to my favoured rival. You seem never to be happy out of his
society. I was first led to throw off the dulness of my unsuspecting
security, by the general voice of the public. The whole court gives you
to each other. Not a creature it holds, but has discerned that passion,
which you have the insolence to expect to conceal from me. Since I have
been awakened from my security, I have seen it a thousand times. I have
seen your eyes seek and encounter each other. I have seen them suddenly
lighted up by your interchanging glances. I have seen the signs of your
mutual intelligence. I have seen with what impatience, the moment you
could escape from the crowded circle, you have joined each other, and
retired together. Ungenerous Pandora!

“‘But do not imagine I will enter the lists with the gaudy butterfly
who has now attracted your favour. I have told you already that I am
not formed for jealousy. I am not the sort of man you have supposed
me to be. I have loved you much; I have loved you long. But I would
tear out my heart from my manly breast, if I believed it yet retained
an atom of passion for you. I know what it was I loved; I loved a
character of frankness, of ingenuousness, of simplicity, which I fondly
imagined was yours, but which I now find was the creature of my own
fancy. The Pandora that stands before me; the child of art; the base
wretch that could take advantage of my forbearance in regard to her
uncle, which was adopted purely out of love to her; the unfeeling
coquette that would wish to retain me in her chains when she had
discarded me from her affections; this creature I never did love, and
I never will. I know how deeply rooted the habit has been in my bosom
of regarding you as the thing you are not; I know how bitter it is to
a temper like mine to detect so unlooked-for a delusion; I know what
it will cost me to cast you off for ever. But I never yet proposed to
myself a conquest over my own weakness that I did not gain, nor will I
now. If you were to discard this wretched D’Aubigny to-morrow, if you
were convinced of and contrite for your error, I must ingenuously tell
you, no time, no penitence could restore you to my admiration. I had
set up an imaginary idol in my bosom; but you have convinced me of its
brittleness, and dashed it to pieces.’

“I endeavoured,” continued Pandora, “by every imaginable protestation
to convince my late faithful lover of his mistake. But it was to no
purpose; all I could say only tended to swell the tide of his fearful
resentment.”

“‘Be silent,’ cried he: ‘add no further to the catalogue of your wanton
and causeless delusions. Do not make me hate too much what I once so
blindly and ardently adored. I feel that I have an enemy within me,
that would fain co-operate with your deceptions and hypocrisy. I find
that man, treacherous to himself, is formed by nature to be the fool
of your artful sex. But I will subdue this propensity in me, though
I die for it. I may be wretched; but I will not despise myself. Have
I not seen your falsehood? Have not all my senses been witnesses of
your guilt? The miracle is that I could have been duped so long. I have
heard this stripling lover of yours inexhaustible in your praises, and
dwelling upon them with an ardour that nothing but passion could have
inspired. I have seen, as I have already told you, the intelligence
of your eyes. I have seen those melting glances, I have heard those
tender and familiar tones between you, that bespoke the most perfect
confidence and the most entire mingling of heart. If I did not believe
this, I should believe worse of you. I should think your heart not
merely capricious, but an absolute prostitute; prepared to bestow
upon hundreds those sweet, those nameless tendernesses of accent and
countenance, which I fondly imagined were reserved for me alone. I
should regard you as the worst and most pernicious acquisition that
could fall to the lot of a man. ‘Go, Pandora,’ added he: ‘my heart is
chaste; my soul is firm. I can no longer be deceived by you; I will not
dispute your charms with the idle boy you have now thought proper to
favour.’ And, saying thus, he burst from me in an agony of impatience.

“Alas!” continued the sweet and ingenuous Pandora, “my dear Henry,
what shall I do? How shall I remove the unreasonable imaginations
of this noble mind? Bear me witness, Heaven! nothing could be more
innocent than the correspondence I allowed myself to hold with you. My
adorable Charles was continually calling you brother; I scarcely ever
heard him speak of you by any other appellation. I regarded Charles
as my husband; I already viewed you in anticipation as the brother of
my lord. Excluded as I was from frequent conversation with him whom I
most loved, I endeavoured to supply the deficiency by an unreserved
communication with you. The extreme resemblance of your persons
increased my gratification. You were his picture, his speaking image.
While I looked at you, I said, ‘Such once was my Charles, before he
was the great man, the gallant soldier, the accomplished cavalier,
the adored object, that now engrosses my affections.’ Beside, I knew
that Charles loved you as much as he did any man on earth, and that
knowledge made you dear to me. You were constantly eager to dwell
upon and describe his excellences; could I fail to be pleased with
your conversation? I own that the pleasure I took in it was unbounded,
and the emotions it awakened in my affectionate heart delicious. But
all this, candidly explained, was only an additional proof of the
tenderness and constancy of my earliest attachment.

“And now, ever since the fatal day in which this conversation passed
with my Charles, he is absent from court, and I know not whither he is
gone. He has disdained to seek any further explanation, nor do I know
how to appeal to his calmer feelings and more deliberate mind. One
thing however I had determined on, and that was, Henry, strictly to
avoid your society.

“I trust, wherever my Charles is, he will hear of this. I owe this
expiation to his agonised feelings, and to the appearances that in
some degree justify his misconstruction. I will wait patiently, till
the simplicity and singleness of my conduct have cleared my faith. If
I should otherwise have found pleasure and relief in your society, I
will make a merit with myself of sacrificing this to the apprehensive
delicacy of my Charles’s mind. In this single instance your importunity
has prevailed with me to dispense with my rule: you were not to
blame, and I thought upon more mature reflection that I owed you an
explanation. But henceforth, if you have any kindness for me, or
value for him who has acted and felt towards you like a brother, I
must entreat you to co-operate with me in this, and that, whether in
public or private, we may bestow no notice on each other, and avoid all
opportunities of communication. To persuade you to this, was indeed a
principal inducement with me so far to deviate from the rule I had laid
down to myself, as to admit this conversation.”

I was extremely affected with the unhappiness of Pandora. I exerted
myself to console her. I promised that nothing on my part should be
wanting to remove every shadow of doubt that hung upon her fidelity,
and I exhorted her to believe that every thing would infallibly
terminate in the way most honourable and gratifying to herself. Pandora
listened to me, and dried her tears. The conversation was interesting
and soothing to us both; we regarded it as the last unreserved and
sympathetic communication we should ever have with each other; it
insensibly grew longer and longer, and we knew not how to put an end
to it. We were still in this state of irresolution when, looking up, I
perceived Charles de Damville approaching from the further end of the
walk that led to the alcove.

I would have withdrawn. I was anxious to remove the unjust suspicion
that hung upon his mind; but the instant that presented to him so
strong an apparent confirmation of them, the instant that by so doing
must have worked up his soul into tumult, did not appear a favourable
one for explanation. To withdraw was impossible. Pandora had discerned
her lover at the same moment with myself. She was seized with a
faintness. She would have sunk to the ground; but I caught her in my
arms. I rested with one knee on the earth; her head was reclined on my
bosom. Charles approached with a quicker pace.

“Rise,” said he. “This is beyond my hopes. I left Presburg with the
purpose of not revisiting it for years; but, as I proceeded further and
further from a place which had lately been the centre of my affections,
I began to doubt whether I had not acted with precipitation, and to
believe that there was yet some uncertainty hanging on my fate. The
seemingly earnest protestations of this delusive syren rung in my ears;
mechanically, without any formed resolution, I changed my course, and
returned on my steps. My doubts are now at an end. I find you taking
instant advantage of my absence to throw yourselves into each other’s
arms. The feelings I so lately uttered in your presence, Pandora, would
have kept you apart, if my feelings had been in the least sacred in
your eyes, if all my surmises had not been too true.”--He took by the
hand the weeping Pandora, and led her to the seat which a little before
she had quitted.

“Why all this artifice? Why all this deceit? It is said that we are
not masters of our own hearts, and that no human passion is formed to
endure for ever. Influenced by these maxims, I could have pardoned your
inconstancy, too fair, too fickle Pandora! but why strain every nerve,
to make me believe you still retained a passion you had discarded, to
subject me to the lingering torture of deceit, instead of communicating
to me a truth, agonising indeed to human frailty, but calculated to
inspire fortitude and decision? This I cannot excuse: this racks me
with the bitterest of disappointments, disappointment in the virtues I
had ascribed to you; and convinces me, that you are neither worthy of
me, nor worthy of happiness.

“And you too, D’Aubigny, you have acted a part in this unworthy plot,
I rescued you from prison, from a dungeon from which, a few hours
before, you had no hope of coming forth alive. I took you under my
protection, when you had no friend; I placed you next myself; I
conceived for you the affection of a brother; I loved you, next in
degree to the mistress of my soul. In return for all that I have done,
and all that I felt for you, you have with insidious heart and every
base disguise, seduced from me the woman of my choice. Why not frankly
and ingenuously have demanded her at my hands? The heart is free; your
reciprocal passion, though I might have regretted it, I should have
been unable to blame; it is the cloak that you have drawn over it, that
proves the baseness of its origin. Do you think I had not the courage
cheerfully and without a murmur to resign to you this illustrious fair
one? I feel that I was worthy to be openly treated. Had I seen in you
a mutual and ingenuous passion, I would not have been the bar to its
just consummation. I would not have sought the person of a woman,
whose heart, in spite perhaps of her better resolutions, was given to
another. I should loathe myself for ever, were I capable of such a
part. It was the sympathetic sentiment towards me, beating in accord
to the sentiment of my own bosom, that I once saw in Pandora, and not
either her peerless beauties, or the excellences I imputed to her mind,
that formed the master-charm which fascinated my soul. I feel that
I had the force, in the negation of my own happiness, to have drawn
comfort and compensation from the happiness of two creatures I so
dearly loved, as D’Aubigny and Pandora.

“But this alleviation in the midst of what you have condemned me to
suffer, you have ungenerously denied me.”----

I sought to interrupt my son. I could no longer bear to see him
involved in so painful an error, and not exert every nerve to rescue
him from it. But his passions were wrought higher than mine: he would
not suffer me to speak.

“Be silent, D’Aubigny! I cannot brook to be interrupted now. My heart
is full; and I must have leave to utter the sentiments that agitate and
distend it.”

He advanced towards Pandora. He took hold of her hand.

“Rise, madam. I shall not long trouble you with the boisterous
impetuousness of my passions. Do not resist me now!”

She rose, and followed him; her face still covered with her
handkerchief, and drowned in tears. He led her to the front of the
alcove: he motioned me to approach; with his other hand he took hold of
mine. He seemed to lift Pandora’s hand to his lips, as if to kiss it;
with a sudden start he put it down again; he held it below the level of
his breast.

During this scene, Pandora and myself were speechless. Most women,
in the situation of Pandora, would, I suppose, have spoken, and have
been eager to vindicate themselves from so groundless an imputation.
But what she did was peculiar to the delicacy and defencelessness of
her personal character. She was overwhelmed, and incapable of effort.
For my own part, my feelings were uncommonly complicated. My apparent
situation was a plain one, the situation of a youth mistaken by his
friend for the seducer of the mistress of that friend; and had my
feelings been merely relative to this situation, I could undoubtedly
have spoken without embarrassment. But with this were involved the
sentiments originating in my secret character, the sentiments of a man
anxious to benefit, and who had devoted himself to the interests of
another; of a father tremblingly alive to the happiness of his son, and
eager to dive into his soul, that he might the more sensibly admire his
virtues, and with a more enlightened skill secure his fortune. I was
silent: Charles de Damville proceeded:--

“Thus,” said he, “I join your hands; thus I withdraw all my claims
upon Pandora; thus I remove every impediment to your wishes. This,
Pandora,--this, D’Aubigny, I was capable of, if you had treated me
honourably, and avowed an honest passion. You do not know Charles de
Damville. You have treated me, as none but the most groveling soul
could deserve to be treated. Had you been ingenuous, I should have a
consolation in what I am doing, that now I cannot have. I can no longer
persuade myself that I am joining two worthy hearts to each other. I
can no longer relieve the bitterness of my own disappointment, by the
image of your future felicity. May I be mistaken! May you be truly
happy in each other! You cannot be happy beyond the wishes formed
in your favour, by him who will remember, to the latest hour of his
existence, how much his heart was devoted to you both.”

Saying this, he burst away from us abruptly, and disappeared. At first,
as I listened to the heroic language of my son, I asked myself whether
it were the expression of a warm heart or a cold one. It costs nothing
to a cold heart to ape the language of heroism, and to pretend to
make the greatest sacrifices, when its constitution has rendered all
effort unnecessary to the feat. But I looked in the face of Charles,
and forgot my doubts. His voice he had indeed wound up to the tone of
his speech; it was a little tremulous, but in the main firm, serious,
deliberate, and elevated. But his countenance was the picture of
distress. There sat enthroned, defying all banishment and disguise, the
anguish of his soul. His eye was haggard; his complexion was colourless
and wan. He had been absent several days from Presburg; his appearance
told me that he could scarcely either have eaten or slept during the
period of his absence. He might talk of the generosity with which he
could resign Pandora; I read in his face what that resignation had
cost, and would go on to cost him. Ingenuous, noble-hearted Charles!
I doubted whether, but for a reverse of the events he apprehended, he
would be able to survive it.

He had no sooner left us, than I applied myself to comfort Pandora.
I swore to her that, in spite of every temporary cloud, I would yet
witness the union of her and her adored chevalier. I assured her that
I would not rest, till I had forced Damville to hear me, and compelled
him to credit the sincerity of my tale.

How many things were there, that, in the scene which had just passed,
I might have urged in answer to Damville, but respecting which my
situation imposed upon me the most rigorous silence! I might have said,
“You call yourself my protector, my benefactor, my patron; the real
relation between us is the reverse of the picture you have drawn. I
want not your protection; I am qualified, if I please, to be a patron
to all the world. I am meditating the most generous things in your
behalf: this perfidious friend, as you deem him, has devoted all his
thoughts, and postponed all his gratifications, that he might prove
himself substantially and in the most important particulars your
friend.”

More than this I might have said. I might have said, “I am your father.
I have no inclinations, no passions contravening your gratification.
I love you with more than a father’s love; I transfer to you all the
affection I entertained for your peerless, murdered mother! All my
study is your happiness. You are to me the whole world, and more than
the whole world. Extensive and singular as are my prerogatives, I fold
them up; I forget them all; and think of you alone.”

I cannot give a stronger proof than is contained in what I have here
stated, of the misery of my condition. I was cheated, as I have once
before remarked, with the form of a man, but had nothing of the
substance. I was endowed with the faculty of speech, but was cut off
from its proper and genuine use. I was utterly alone in the world,
separated by an insurmountable barrier from every being of my species.
No man could understand me; no man could sympathise with me; no man
could form the remotest guess at what was passing in my breast. I had
the use of words; I could address my fellow-beings; I could enter
into dialogue with them. I could discourse of every indifferent
thing that the universe contained; I could talk of every thing but
my own feelings. This, and not the dungeon of Bethlem Gabor, is the
true solitude. Let no man, after me, pant for the acquisition of the
philosopher’s stone!

Charles de Damville had again left Presburg, the very instant he
quitted the alcove. When I inquired for him in the palace, I received
this afflicting intelligence. I did not hesitate a moment in resolving
that I would pursue his steps. It was of the utmost consequence that I
should overtake him; all that was most interesting to me hung upon our
interview. The preparations however of my journey, though followed with
ardour, inevitably reduced me to the being some hours in the rear of my
son. I was continually in his track, but could not come up with him:
to judge from events, you would have supposed that he had as strong a
motive to fly, as I had to pursue. He led me along the course of the
Danube, to the source of that far-famed and munificent river.

I reached the passage of the Rhine, and was on the point of crossing
into Alsace. But here I lost all notice of Charles; no enquiry I could
make was effectual to procure me the slightest intelligence. He had not
crossed the river; he had proceeded neither to the right nor the left
along its banks. I was disappointed, mortified, and distressed. What
was I to do next? Could I return to Pandora? What tale must I relate to
this adorable creature, whom I had urged to depend upon my exertions?
Could I leave her however to the anguish and uncertainty that must
follow upon her hearing no more either from her lover or myself?

I think I never felt more truly depressed than in this conjuncture.
Most amply, most critically did the curse of the _opus magnum_ attend
upon my projects, and render all my exertions abortive. It was the
same, whether my plans were formed upon a larger or a smaller scale.
When I endeavoured to live in total obscurity in Madrid, when I
undertook to be the steward and the father of the people of Hungary,
and now that, with a chastised ambition I sought, what is permitted to
all other human creatures, to provide for the honourable settlement of
my only son, still, still my evil genius pursued me, and blasted every
concern in which I presumed to interfere. I had intruded between two
faithful lovers: unfortunate they had been indeed, and considerable
obstacles were interposed to their felicity; but obstacles are
commonly found to yield to firmness and constancy; and, without my
fatal interference, Charles and Pandora would one day have been
happy. If by adverse fates they had hitherto been kept asunder, still
they understood each other, and rejoiced in their mutual confidence
and attachment. This, the consolation of all their sorrows and
disappointments, it was mine to have destroyed. The globe, for aught I
knew, would speedily be interposed between them, and here I stood in
the middle point, like one of those invincible repulsive powers hid in
the storehouse of nature, forbidding to them all future retrogression
to each other.




CHAPTER XLVII.


The picture which my distracted fancy thus set before the eye of my
mind, was not altogether verified in the event. After a thousand
fruitless inquiries and perquisitions, I found, to my utter
astonishment, that Charles, arresting his career at the town of
Fribourg, had returned upon his steps, and sought a second time the
metropolis of Austrian Hungary. This was of the class of those events
which we sometimes meet with in the world, that baffle all calculation,
and strike us like magic, or like madness, in their authors.

I had nothing to do, as I conceived, on this occasion, but to follow
the example of my son, and like him to resume the route of Presburg.
I yet hoped to witness, if not to co-operate in, the reconciliation
of Charles and Pandora. My spirits in this respect were revived, and
my prospects made brighter, by the thoughts that these virtuous and
meritorious lovers were at last likely to be once again inclosed within
the cincture of the same city. Add to which, my Venetian confederate
had not yet made his appearance at Presburg; and not only was I under
engagements to give him the meeting there, but it was also clear
that his errand could not be brought to its proper close without my
assistance.

I once more entered the city to which Pandora owed her birth. Charles
de Damville had preceded my arrival several days. I should without
delay have repaired to his apartments, but that I found at my own
lodgings a letter from Benedetto Cabriera of Venice, informing me that
he was now in Presburg, and to avoid all cause for suspicion, had taken
up his residence in a remote quarter of the town. From the enquiries
I made, I became satisfied that my son had in some degree resumed
his usual occupations, and that there was no appearance of his again
immediately quitting the metropolis. I therefore felt my transaction
with Cabriera more urgent than an immediate conference with Charles.
Though I had sought that conference with earnest expedition, yet I
dreaded it. It might require the maturest consideration and the nicest
management, to render it effectual for the purposes I sought. I found
from certain intelligence that Damville and Pandora had yet had no
explanation with each other. I therefore regarded my exertions for that
purpose as a final effort; and I was willing that every thing should be
in train, and the portion of Pandora fully adjusted, before I entered
upon that interesting scene. With Cabriera I had little difficulty. The
documents and evidences of his tale we had concerted at Venice; and I
presently found that he told his story so plausibly, and supported it
so consistently, that it was admitted by every one without the smallest
suspicion.

No sooner had Cabriera opened his business to the parties to whom the
cognisance of it most properly belonged, than I once more presented
myself to the beautiful and engaging niece of Nadasti. The instant I
entered her apartment, I was shocked with the extreme change of her
personal appearance. All the airiness, alertness and vivacity, that
had once so exquisitely adorned her, were gone. The roses in her cheek
were faded, and had given place to a delicate, but sickly paleness.
Her arms, though always what is called white, had before been round,
and had been distinguished by the purest hue of health. They were
now emaciated, skinny, and colourless. Her eyes were hollow, and
her eyelids inflamed with weeping. All these changes had taken place
in about five weeks that had elapsed since I saw her last. I was so
struck with the sight, that I involuntarily started, and could scarcely
command myself enough to refrain from tears. It was plain that she
carried an arrow in her bosom, which one hand only in the universe
could extract with safety. As I approached, she raised her lovely head
that had been depressed with grief, and lifted her white arms with an
expression of despair.

“Come nearer, my sweet Henry,” said she, “I rejoice to see you; though
you have proved my worst enemy, the destroyer of my peace. But your
intentions, my kind boy, my brother, for such I will still call you,
have always been good and innocent. But, ah, Henry, you have deluded
me; you urged me to banish despair; and every day I see more reason to
despair.”

I asked if she had not seen the chevalier since his return to Presburg.

“It were better for me,” replied Pandora, “if I had not seen him. What
has really happened, is worse than if I had been denied to see him. I
have met him every day in the apartments of my aunt. To an indifferent
eye it would have appeared as if he neither sought nor avoided me. He
carries himself towards me with a cold and constrained civility. But he
neither demands an interview, nor allows me the opportunity to utter a
word to him in private. Oh, D’Aubigny, I see too well that I have lost
him for ever. When he fled my presence, when he resolved to seek some
distant region, cruel as that conduct was, it convinced me that I was
of some importance to him. But now he passes by me in stern neglect;
he has utterly driven me from his heart. Indeed, my brother, this last
blow is too much; I feel that I shall never recover it.”

“And does the chevalier,” cried I, “appear at his ease? Does he exhibit
the wonted symptoms of his health and triumphant spirit?”

“Away; too pleasing deluder!” replied Pandora. “Cheat me not with false
hopes! flatter me not with unreal expectations! Damville does not
appear to be well or happy. But you have deceived me too much; the
disappointments that you prepared for me are too excruciating. I feel
now at no time so high a degree of gloomy satisfaction and composure,
as when I press despair firmly to my breast.

“But you, Henry,” continued she, “are probably uninformed of my
last and severest misfortune. I had a great uncle in the list of
the adventurers that achieved the conquest of Peru; he has died,
and unexpectedly bequeathed me a fortune, that sets the portionless
Pandora upon a level with the wealthy heiresses of the great palatine
himself. For a long time want of fortune was the only obstacle that
stood between me and all my hopes of happiness. Now that poverty is no
longer an evil to me, and wealth no longer desirable, I have obtained
this unwelcome acquisition. You can have no conception how painful a
sensation is produced by this mockery, the gift of ample possessions to
the votary of despair.”

I endeavoured somewhat to encourage Pandora; but she obstinately
rejected my soothings. I was the less importunate on this subject,
as, since the return of my son, I persisted to persuade myself that I
should soon have something more substantial to offer her on his part,
than mere guesses and conjectures. The day after this conversation, I
boldly sought the presence of the chevalier. Till then, I had, since
our return to Presburg, avoided to meet him. I now resolved to force
from him a hearing; to assure him, with the most solemn asseverations,
of my own innocence, and the constancy of his mistress; to represent to
him in how eminent a degree the newly acquired estate of Pandora was
calculated to facilitate their mutual wishes; and finally, to offer him
any pledge he should desire of the sincerity of my declarations, even
to the banishing myself from the presence and intercourse of him and
the lovely Pandora for ever.

When I saw my son, his appearance and air advanced a forcible claim
on my compassion. I will not now describe them. Suffice it, that they
completely proved, how true was the sympathy, even to the minutest
particulars, between him and his mistress. The difference was only
in kind, and not in degree: hers a defenceless, a delicate and truly
feminine grief; while his, amidst all its aggravations, had something
in it of the champion and the hero. When he felt most severely, he
seemed to disdain himself for what he felt; and, though his struggles
were excruciating, he resolutely smoothed his manly front, and the
loftiness of his spirit produced on his cheek a generous and a settled
blush.

I have just said that I had resolved to force from him a hearing. I was
mistaken in my calculations on this point. Dejected as his habits had
lately been, he no sooner saw me, than he advanced towards me with a
fierce and imperative demeanour, that absolutely startled me.

“How is it, man!” cried he, “that you are at this hour out of custody?”

“Custody!” interdicted and astonished, repeated I.

“Yes, custody! If such a wretch as thou art, be permitted to go at
large, what human institution, what human possessions, shall ever be
secure?”

“Good God,” said I, “what am I to understand by your present rage?
I know that you have considered me as your personal enemy and the
underminer of your happiness. But, when first you accused me of this
crime, you treated me in a manner less violent and disdainful than that
which you now employ.”

“I brook not to explain. Read that letter. I received it at Fribourg.
That letter brought me back from the confines of France to the spot
where now we meet.”

I took up the letter. Its contents were nearly as follow:--

                                LETTER.

    “My dear Friend,--You will permit me to call you so, since to
    me, and me only, you have recently thought proper to confide
    your projects, and your unfortunate passion for the charming
    Pandora. What you related to me on the subject convinced me
    how much she was unworthy of your love, and how basely she has
    conducted herself towards you. Yet you will yourself feel some
    compassion for her, when you learn who it is upon whom she
    has bestowed this unmerited preference. Know then that this
    wretched D’Aubigny is no other than the notorious Chatillon,
    the infamous impostor, who, by his machinations about a
    year ago preserved the Turkish provinces of Hungary from
    being conquered by the christian arms. The man is moreover a
    magician, the pretended or real possessor of the philosopher’s
    stone. He is therefore doubly worthy of death, first as a
    traitor, the abettor and comforter of the common enemy of the
    christian faith, and, secondly, as a dealer in the black art,
    and a man notoriously sold and delivered over to the devil.

    “I have received this information from the most unquestionable
    authority. A soldier in my old corps, who has lately escaped
    from a Turkish prison, no sooner saw him than he identified
    his person. I happened to be near the fellow at the moment,
    when, by an unexpected exclamation, he betrayed his discovery.
    It immediately struck me that the circumstance might be of
    importance to your interests; and, therefore, taking the
    soldier aside, I charged him not to mention to any one what
    he had observed. To render his secrecy the more secure, I
    have since removed him to a garrison at some distance from
    Presburg; and I have myself mentioned the circumstance to no
    living creature, that I might first receive your instructions
    on the subject, and act in all respects concerning it as you
    shall judge proper. The blackness of the character of the
    man sets all exaggeration at defiance. This very individual,
    whom you liberated from the bowels of the earth, who by the
    most treacherous arts won your confidence, and upon whom you
    lavishly heaped every imaginable distinction, was all the while
    conscious to himself, that he was the character that of all
    that live you hated most; in one word, the renegado Chatillon.
    He acted consistently with his preceding conduct and his recent
    disingenuousness, when he seduced from you the affections of
    the woman of your choice.

    “I am concerned to add, that, on the very day that I made
    this discovery, this Chatillon D’Aubigny disappeared from
    Presburg, nor can I by any effort learn whither he is gone. It
    is impossible he should have been informed by any human means
    of the detection that had happened. But indeed it is vain
    to attempt to form any reasonable conjecture, respecting a
    character so mysterious and inexplicable.

                         “Your devoted friend,

                                        “ANDREW, count of BATHORI.”

“Well, sir,” seeing I had finished the perusal, “and what have you now
to allege? When I saw you simply as the favoured lover of Pandora,
however treacherous and dishonourable I might deem your conduct towards
me, I quitted the field. I did not trust myself to be a judge in my
own cause. I did not confide in my estimate of your unworthiness,
when I was myself wholly concerned. I had some time before received
an invitation from the duke d’Aumale, who was collecting a number of
generous and high-spirited nobles to accompany Mary queen of Scots to
the barbarous fields of her native realm. I at first declined, I now
accepted, the invitation; I set out for Paris to join him. I found
that letter waiting my arrival at Fribourg, and I returned. Deeply as
Pandora has sunk in my esteem, I determined I would never allow her to
be thrown away upon the infamous Chatillon.

“You haunt my steps. I heard of you again and again on my route as
I returned from Fribourg. I arrive at Presburg, and presently after
you again make your appearance. What further villanies have you to
act? What new treacheries have you devised against me? This morning I
consented to the representations of count Bathori, and agreed that you
should be delivered up to justice. Why then are you not in custody?

“When I consider the mystery and inscrutableness of your character,
I am lost in conjecture. You are said to be a magician, a dealer in
the unhallowed secrets of alchymy and the _elixir vitæ_. In cases
like this, all the ordinary rules of human sagacity and prudence are
superseded, the wisest man is a fool, and the noblest spirit feels the
very ground he stood on struck from under his feet. How can I know
that the seduction of Pandora’s affections is not owing to magical
incantations, who in that case is rather an object for compassion than
for censure? How can I tell that the fraternal resemblance borne by
your features to my own, and the sudden and ardent partiality that
rose in my breast when first I saw you, have not been produced by the
most detested arts? Magic dissolves the whole principle and arrangement
of human action, subverts all generous enthusiasm and dignity, and
renders life itself loathsome and intolerable.

“This is to me the most painful of all subjects. I had a father whom
I affectionately loved: he became the dupe of these infernal secrets.
I had a mother, the paragon of the creation: that father murdered
her. All the anguish I ever felt, has derived its source from alchymy
and magic. While the infamous Chatillon thus stands before me, I feel
all the long-forgotten wounds of my heart new opened, and the blood
bursting afresh from every vein. I have rested, and been at peace; and
now the red and venomed plague, that tarnished the years of my opening
youth, returns to blast me. Begone, infamous, thrice-damned villain!
and let me never see thee more!

“Wretch that you are!” continued Charles; for he saw me motioning to
withdraw,--I felt that all further expostulation and discussion on
my part was useless,--“wretch that you are! what is it that you are
about to do? Think no to escape my vengeance! In the midst of all the
tumultuous passions you waken in my breast, I still feel in myself the
soldier and the man of honour. I am not a thief-taker or a bailiff.
You are within my power, and that is your present protection. I will
not now deliver you up to the justice of the state, but will hurl
against you my personal defiance. I am willing to meet you man to man:
I thirst to encounter you as my worst and most mortal foe, who has
perpetrated against me the basest injuries, and excited in my bosom the
most hateful sensations. Though you were fenced with all the legions of
hell, I fear you not; and seeing that, after all that is past, you have
once again intruded into my presence, I here bind myself by all that is
sacred to pursue you to the death.”

What could I answer to such an attack? I saw at once that the case,
as to all future harmony between me and my son was desperate and
irremediable. What hope could I entertain further? What had hitherto
been the result of our ill-fated intercourse? Every offence and
prejudice that can gall the human mind had been brought forward in it
in turn. I had wounded Damville in the most sensible point of private
life, and had blasted his hopes there where he stored them all. I had
offended his most rooted political prepossessions, by aiding the Turk,
and feeding a nation that perished with hunger. I was an equivocal
character, assuming different names, and wandering over the world with
different pretences. Last of all, I had revived in his mind the images
of his father and his mother,--all that had once been most dear, and
now was most painful, to his recollection; and had tortured his fancy
with nameless horrors. These sentiments could never be removed. All the
explanations in the world could never reconcile me to his mind; and I
felt that I had that within, which, in what was to come, as it had in
what was past, must for ever annihilate all confidence between us. At
once therefore I accepted his challenge, arranged with him the terms of
a hostile encounter on the following morning, and immediately after bid
adieu to Presburg, and to the sight of every soul contained within its
walls, for ever.

This is, I powerfully feel, the last adventure that I shall ever have
the courage to commit to writing. A few minutes more, and I will lay
down my pen, and resolve in the most solemn and sacred manner never to
compose another line. Indeed, all other adventures must necessarily
be frigid and uninteresting, compared with that which I have now
described. Great God, what a fate was mine! Anxious as I had been to
prove myself in the most momentous respects the benefactor of my son,
dismissing all other thoughts and cares from my mind, journeying with
this sole object in view, from Presburg to Venice, and from Venice to
Presburg, from Hungary to the banks of the Rhine, and from the banks of
the Rhine back again to Hungary,--the whole scene was now terminated
by a declaration on his part, that nothing could appease the animosity
he cherished against me, short of rioting in the blood of his father’s
heart. I was reduced to the necessity either of lifting my sword
against my son, of running myself upon the point of his weapon, or of
forfeiting the engagement between us, and suffering him to brand me as
a coward in the face of Christendom. I mention not this, because the
variety of objects of choice produced in me the slightest hesitation.
Weary as I was of life, I could cheerfully have consented to die, but
not to stain the sword of Charles de Damville with my vital blood. I
prevented him from being the assassin of his father’s life; I could
not prevent him from being the assassin of his father’s character. He
was assiduous and indefatigable in spreading against me the blackest
invectives, which he regarded as the most unerring truths. All Hungary
has resounded for thirty years with the atrocities of the sieur de
Chatillon; what is here recorded contains the whole and unvarnished
truth on the subject. This narrative however shall never see the light,
till the melancholy hour when Charles de Damville shall be no more.

Yet in the midst of the anguish, the disappointment of every cherished
hope, which rends my soul, I have one consolation, and that an
invaluable one, in the virtues, the glory, and the happiness of my
son. I said I would forget every gratification and sentiment of my own
in him; I am now more than ever instigated to do so. When I quitted
Presburg, I left Cabriera behind me in that city, and I took care to
obtain a parting interview with him. He afterwards gave me the meeting,
as we then concerted, at Trieste in the duchy of Carniola. It happened,
as I had flattered myself the event would prove, that, the visible
source of umbrage being removed, Charles and Pandora in no long time
came to a mutual understanding, and were finally made happy in each
other. I had been the fortunate means of supplying to this excellent
and incomparable creature the only defect under which she laboured,
a want of fortune; her uncle, having no longer a pretence to oppose
their mutual passion, united their hands; and, at the time of which I
am speaking, they were regarded as the most graceful and accomplished
couple in the whole Hungarian dominions. The chevalier de Damville
is considered in that country as the great bulwark of the Christian
frontier, and the most generous and illustrious pupil in the school of
the Bayards and the Scanderbegs. Cabriera, worn out with years and
fatigues, but still grasping and avaricious to his latest hour, expired
in my arms in the city of Trieste; and by his death yielded me this
contentment, that henceforth the only obvious means for detecting my
beneficent fraud in securing the dower of Pandora was for ever removed.

That the reader may enter the more fully into my sentiment of
congratulation upon the happiness of my son, and rise from the perusal
of my narrative with a more soothing and pleasurable sensation, I will
here shortly recapitulate the good qualities that had been unfolded
in this truly extraordinary young man from his earliest infancy.
He was a child, only nine years of age, at the period of the truly
affecting and exemplary behaviour the reader may remember him to have
displayed, while I was at Paris squandering the property of my family
at the gaming-table. In the alienation of mind produced in me by
that dreadful catastrophe, he was my constant attendant, my careful
nurse, and my affectionate friend. When, twelve months after, we were
driven by our calamities out of Switzerland, and I lay extended to
all human appearance on the bed of death, Charles was the comforter
of his mother, the friend of his sisters, and even, young as he was,
contributed to the maintenance of my starving family by the labour
of his infant hands. At Dresden, as yet no more than seventeen years
of age, he was assailed by one of the severest trials with which the
mind of man can in any case be beset. But he hesitated not a moment.
Obliged to choose between poverty and innocence, with the sacrifice
of all his habitudes, and the loss of every friend, on the one side,
and wealth, new to his enjoyment, with ignominy or an equivocal
character, on the other, his determination was instant and unalterable.
Cast, at so immature an age, alone and portionless, upon the world,
he almost immediately, by his gallantry, his winning qualities,
and his virtues, gained to himself a friend in one of the greatest
captains of the age. Unaided by the brilliancy of family or fortune,
he acquired the character of the bravest soldier in Hungary, where
all were brave. This last trial, to which I had been the undesigning
means of subjecting him, was none of the least arduous. Love often
entails imbecility on the noblest of mankind: but Charles surmounted
the most perilous attacks of this all-conquering passion. When he
thought Pandora unworthy, he tore himself from her, and would not
admit a struggle. When he believed she loved another, he disdained to
claim a heart that seemed alienated from him, and himself joined the
hands of his mistress and his rival. He might have died; he could not
disgrace himself. I was the hero’s father!--but no! I am not blinded
by paternal partiality;--but no! he was indeed what I thought him, as
near the climax of dignity and virtue as the frailty of our nature will
admit. His virtue was at length crowned with the most enviable reward
the earth has to boast,--the faithful attachment of a noble-minded
and accomplished woman. I am happy to close my eventful and somewhat
melancholy story with so pleasing a termination. Whatever may have
been the result of my personal experience of human life, I can never
recollect the fate of Charles and Pandora without confessing with
exultation, that this busy and anxious world of ours yet contains
something in its stores that is worth living for.

THE END.